Title: Planning with Transformers: Chain of Computation and Structured Context Windows

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.17710v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Jul 2026 01:38:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
Preprint 

# PLANNING WITH TRANSFORMERS :CHAIN OF COMPUTATION AND STRUCTURED CON -

# TEXT WINDOWS 

Ehsan Futuhi 1 , Nathan R. Sturtevant 1,2 

> 1

Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta 2Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii) 

{futuhi, nathanst }@ualberta.ca 

## ABSTRACT 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have had a remarkable impact across many areas of machine learning. However, recent studies have shown that they struggle to re-liably solve planning problems, particularly when compared to classical planners and planning frameworks such as PDDL. Even with recent advances in reasoning-oriented models, the extent to which LLMs can genuinely perform planning re-mains an open question. At the same time, theoretical results have shown that transformers, the core architecture underlying modern LLMs, are Turing-complete and therefore capable of universal computation in principle. In this work, we in-vestigate this apparent gap between the theoretical computational power of LLMs and their empirical planning performance. We propose Chain of Computation (COC) , a computational architecture that places a transformer-based LM inside an iterative loop, leveraging its strength as a pattern-matching system rather than re-quiring it to generate complete plans in a single pass. The COC uses a Structured Context Window (SCW) which provides a constant-sized context window with support for choosing which window is used at each planning step. Within this ar-chitecture, the LM is able to learn a planning policy, predicts the world model, and performs the arithmetic operations required during planning. We show that, when given an append-only SCW (resembling a Turing Machine tape), even relatively small LMs trained from scratch can learn planning policies and generalize from a small number of training instances within each planning domain, achieving suc-cess rates above 99.89% on BlocksWorld and the Pancake puzzle. Our analysis of failure cases in Tower of Hanoi (TOH) reveals that they arise from arithmetic operations or from encountering previously unseen tokens. We show that COC can solve TOH problem instances with up to 20 disks, requiring over 1 million actions, while requiring substantially less training data by either (1) planning with symbolical support for arithmetic or by (2) using a deterministic pushdown au-tomaton (PDA) formulation for the SCW. 

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023) have demonstrated re-markable success across a wide range of applications, including conversational agents (Team et al., 2023; Achiam et al., 2023), code generation (Chen et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2024), and financial ap-plications (Wu et al., 2023; Xiao et al., 2025). In recent years, substantial effort has been devoted to improving the reasoning capabilities of LLMs through techniques such as Chain-of-Thought (COT) prompting and reinforcement learning (Wei et al., 2022; Nye et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2025; Li et al., 2026b). These advances have led to impressive performance on a variety of benchmarks, including mathematical reasoning (Cobbe et al., 2021), commonsense and logical reasoning (Suzgun et al., 2023), and planning (Kokel et al., 2026). Despite this progress, the performance of LLMs on plan-ning tasks involving multi-step decision making remains limited. Numerous studies have shown that LLMs fail on planning problems that are relatively easy for humans to solve (Valmeekam et al., 2023; Dziri et al., 2023; Pallagani et al., 2023; Sel et al., 2025; Shojaee et al., 2025; Kambhampati et al., 2024). Moreover, even when they are able to solve planning domains such as BlocksWorld, 1arXiv:2607.17710v1 [cs.LG] 20 Jul 2026 Preprint Standard LM Planning 

Single-Pass, Full Context 

User Prompt: Solve TOH with 7 disks 

LLM 

> Move disk 1 from peg 1 to peg 3
> Move disk 2 from peg 1 to peg 2
> Move disk 1 from peg 1 to peg 3
> …
> Output: Full Plan
> (Sequence of Moves)

Chain of Computation (COC) 

User Prompt: Solve TOH with 7 disks     

> CALL n=7 src=1 dst=3 aux=2
> LM
> 0123
> Write Output to Tape
> CALL n=7 src=1 dst=3 aux=2
> MOVE d=7 src=1 dst=3
> CALL n=6 src=1 dst=2 aux=3
> Generate next pointer

pt+1 

> Read instruction at

pt

> … …
> Repeat until

pt = − 1

> Read the Full Plan
> (sequence of moves) from
> the Tape

SCW 

> Reasoning Trace (Internal COT steps)
> Step 1: Move the top 6 disks from peg 1 to peg 2 using peg 3 as
> auxiliary
> Step 2: Move the largest disk from peg 1 to peg 3
> Step 3: Move the 6 disks from peg 2 to peg 3 using peg 1 as
> auxiliary
> …
> Move disk 1 from peg 1 to peg 3
> Move disk 2 from peg 1 to peg 2
> Move disk 1 from peg 1 to peg 3
> …

Figure 1: Comparison between standard LM planning and Chain of Computation (COC). Instead of generating an entire plan in a single pass from the full context, COC employs a smaller LM that iteratively processes one instruction from a structured context window (SCW), updates the SCW, and generates the next pointer, pt+1 . The process terminates when pt = −1, after which the complete action sequence is extracted. The example shown corresponds to the Tower of Hanoi (TOH) domain. they often fail to generalize to more complex instances of the same problem, suggesting that they have not learned the underlying planning algorithm. Some have suggested that LLMs may be inca-pable of planning without separate logical oracles Belle & Marcus (2026). This raises a fundamental question: if LLMs are capable of sophisticated reasoning in some contexts, what prevents them from achieving the same level of success in other contexts, in particular on planning tasks? Shojaee et al. (2025) investigate the performance gap between state-of-the-art large reasoning mod-els (LRMs) and their non-reasoning counterparts in multi-step decision-making tasks. Their ap-proach incorporates a few in-context examples and explicitly provides the planning algorithm for each domain within the prompt. One of their key findings is that, beyond a certain problem com-plexity threshold, the performance of both reasoning and non-reasoning models collapses to nearly zero. Interestingly, increasing problem complexity does not induce additional reasoning behavior in these models; instead, performance deteriorates at a similar or even earlier point compared to simpler instances. On the other hand, a complementary line of theoretical work investigates whether LLMs are Turing-complete, i.e., whether they can realize arbitrary computational behavior equiva-lent to a Turing machine (Lewandowski et al., 2026; Bhattamishra et al., 2020; P´ erez et al., 2021; Giannou et al., 2023; Malach, 2024; Zhong et al., 2022). Lewandowski et al. (2026) show, via a proof-by-simulation, that a language model can exactly simulate a universal Lag system (Wang, 1963), which is known to be computationally universal. This result implies that language mod-els are Turing-complete and, in principle, capable of general-purpose computation. Furthermore, they demonstrate that similar computational capabilities can emerge even in randomly initialized language models, suggesting that universal computation is an inherent property of the architecture, while training primarily serves to make this capability more practical to exploit. In another influen-tial theoretical work, Giannou et al. (2023) show that transformers, the core architecture underlying modern language models, can learn iterative algorithms such as square root and matrix inversion when executed in a loop with encoded weights. Despite these encouraging theoretical results, it remains unclear how such algorithmic capabilities generalize to other tasks and, more importantly, how the corresponding weights can be learned efficiently from training data. In this work, we investigate the gap between the theoretical computational power of transformer-based language models and their empirical performance on planning tasks. Throughout this paper, we use the term LM to refer to transformer-based language models, regardless of their size or rea-2Preprint soning capability. We propose a Chain of Computation (COC) architecture, which leverages the pattern-matching capabilities of transformers by placing them inside an iterative planning loop. The planning procedure is represented as a sequence of iterative steps, where each step consists of read-ing from and generating outputs to a Structured Context Window (SCW) , which serves as an external memory. At each iteration, the LM receives the contents of a single context window together with the relevant local context and generates the corresponding output. All outputs generated by the model are written to new entries in the SCW. When used for planning, the context from the SCW functions as instructions for the next step of the planning process. The instruction to be executed at each iteration is determined by a pointer , which specifies the portion of the SCW visible to the LM. Importantly, the pointer to the next instruction is generated by the LM itself, allowing the model to determine which part of the SCW to access in the next step of computation. The planning process begins with the instruction at position zero of the SCW and terminates when the model generates the pointer value −1. During training, the LM is optimized on instruction–output pairs with the objective of generalizing at test time to the same operations applied to previously unseen variables and problem instances. We provide extensive evaluations on three planning domains: BlocksWorld, Tower of Hanoi (TOH), and the Pancake Puzzle. In BlocksWorld and the Pancake Puzzle, we show that training on a rel-atively small number of problem instances at each complexity level is sufficient for the model to generalize to unseen problem instances across all complexity levels, achieving average success rates exceeding 99 .89% . In TOH, we demonstrate that the model can generalize to unseen instructions held out during training, achieving an average success rate of 92% on problems ranging from 1 to 15 disks. By analyzing the failure cases, we find that arithmetic operations on previously unseen numbers and unseen tokens are the primary sources of errors. We show that handling arithmetic op-erations symbolically eliminates the failures and substantially reduces the amount of required train-ing data. Alternatively, the same performance can be achieved by using a stack for the SCW. In this architecture, the pointer always points to the top of the SCW, with stack push and pop operations, allowing COC to be formulated as a deterministic pushdown automaton (PDA) . This formulation preserves the behavior of the original architecture while simplifying the memory access mechanism, as the LM is no longer required to perform computations using the address of the top of the stack. 

## 2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 

Overview of Research Directions in LLM Planning We broadly categorize prior work at the intersection of LLMs and planning into several groups. First, survey papers provide overviews of existing approaches and outline directions for future research (Huang et al., 2025; Chiari et al., 2025; Tantakoun et al., 2025; Pallagani et al., 2024). Second, empirical and benchmark studies evaluate and compare the planning abilities of state-of-the-art LLMs across different domains (Dziri et al., 2023; Shojaee et al., 2025; Kokel et al., 2025; 2026; Pallagani et al., 2023; Valmeekam et al., 2023; Aghzal et al., 2024; Bohnet et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2026; Bohnet et al., 2026). Third, a line of work focuses on integrating LLMs with planning algorithms (Meng et al., 2024; Hazra et al., 2024; Hao et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023; Shah et al., 2023; Katz et al., 2024; Schultz et al., 2025; Li et al., 2026a; Corrˆ ea et al., 2026) or using search-based reasoning (e.g., tree search) within LLM prompting (Sel et al., 2024; Gandhi et al., 2024). Finally, theoretical works study the computational properties of LLMs, including their general computation capabilities (Lewandowski et al., 2026; Malach, 2024; Schuurmans, 2023; Jiang et al., 2026; Li et al., 2024; Hou et al., 2025), as well as their ability to learn algorithms with guarantees, often through the lens of length generalization (Giannou et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024; Hua et al., 2026; Malach et al., 2026; Chen et al., 2026; Fan et al., 2025). 

LLM-Augmented Planning Methods Meng et al. (2024) propose a planning algorithm, LLM-A* ,in which the classical A* algorithm is augmented with an LLM. The model is prompted to generate a sequence of intermediate target states at the beginning of planning, such that the sequence starts from the initial state and ends at the goal state. These intermediate targets guide the search, and an additional cost term is introduced based on the distance to the current target. Hao et al. (2023) propose Reasoning via Planning (RAP), which integrates LLMs with an offline planning algorithm such as Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS). In this framework, the LLM plays two roles: (1) as a world model that generates new states in the search tree, and (2) as a policy that selects actions during simulations. To reduce the number of queries required by multi-step reasoning methods, Sel 3Preprint et al. (2024) propose Algorithm of Thoughts (AoT), an in-context learning approach in which the model is provided with examples of the search process itself, rather than only problem–solution pairs or step-by-step solutions. 

Turing-Completeness of LLMs Schuurmans (2023) show that the fundamental limits of LLM reasoning are not necessarily rooted in their weights, but rather in the constraints imposed by the context window and available memory. They prove that transformer-based LLMs are Turing-complete, i.e., capable of universal computation, when equipped with an external read–write mem-ory. Lewandowski et al. (2026) further show that the context window itself can serve as the available memory for the LLM. Specifically, they demonstrate that an LLM can emulate a tag system, which, by moving both forward and backward over the context, can simulate a Turing machine. Malach (2024) argue that the power of modern LMs largely stems from their autoregressive next-token pre-diction training, particularly when applied to Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning. They show that even linear next-token predictors can approximate any function that is efficiently computable by a Turing machine. Jiang et al. (2026) identify a key limitation in prior proofs of Turing-completeness for CoT-based transformers (Li & Wang, 2026; Meng et al., 2024), namely the reliance on hard-max attention, which is not a realistic assumption and does not provide guarantees on trainability. To address this limitation, they prove that transformers with standard softmax attention are also Turing-complete and provide guarantees on length generalization. 

Length-generalization of LLMs. Zhou et al. (2024) study which algorithms are easier for trans-formers to learn. They characterize an algorithm as easier to learn (e.g., counting or mode compu-tation) if the model can length-generalize, i.e., generalize to longer instances of the same problem. They further show that tasks expressible in the RASP-L language, a learnable variant of the origi-nal RASP language (Weiss et al., 2021), tend to exhibit better length generalization, although such generalization is not guaranteed and remains limited in practice. Malach et al. (2026) show that, although state space models (SSMs) (Gu et al., 2022) are more computationally efficient for long contexts compared to transformers (whose complexity scales quadratically with sequence length), they still fail to solve problems when the required context exceeds the model’s capacity. They further demonstrate that incorporating external tool use significantly improves the length generalization of both SSMs and transformers. Hua et al. (2026) propose Turing Machine Imitation Learning (TAIL), where the goal is to imitate the serialized linear state transitions of a Turing machine through COT reasoning. TAIL consists of three core components: (1) Linear Transition , which enforces sequential computation; (2) Atomic States , which ensures that each step is sufficiently simple to avoid short-cut learning; and (3) Memory Fetcher , which provides the necessary operands for each transition. Although TAIL improves length generalization across a variety of computable problems, there re-mains a performance gap compared to strong closed-source reasoning models (e.g., O4-mini) when evaluated on models such as Qwen2.5 (Hui et al., 2024). 

Limitations of LLMs in Planning Valmeekam et al. (2023) were among the first to systemati-cally investigate claims about the reasoning abilities of LLMs by evaluating their performance on planning tasks. Their findings indicate that LLMs at the time were rarely successful at autonomously generating valid solution plans. Notably, they show that performance degrades significantly when object names are obfuscated, suggesting that LLM-generated plans rely more on learned semantic associations than on robust reasoning. Building on this line of work, Shojaee et al. (2025) revisit similar experiments using newer reasoning-oriented models. They find that while reasoning models can outperform non-reasoning models on instances of moderate complexity, both types of models fail at similar levels as problem complexity increases. Katz et al. (2024) highlight the computational cost and inefficiency of LLM-based planning approaches such as RAP (Hao et al., 2023). They show that a common limitation of these methods is the need to query the LLM at every step of the planning process, which becomes prohibitively slow and costly in large state spaces. To address this, they propose using LLMs to generate environment simulators and associated functions prior to planning, which can then be leveraged by classical planning algorithms. 

Reasoning Investigation in LLMs Dziri et al. (2023) identify two key challenges that motivate our approach. First, as problem complexity grows, errors introduced in early stages of the compu-tation tend to accumulate, leading to degraded performance on longer and more complex instances. Second, LLMs often exhibit shortcut learning (Geirhos et al., 2020), relying on pattern matching 4Preprint over linearized solution traces rather than reasoning and learning the underlying compositional struc-ture of the task. Chen et al. (2026) study the reasoning abilities of LLMs in a high-stakes domain, namely legal judgment. They analyze the representations and interactions between input tokens to assess their influence on generated outputs. One of their key findings is that LLMs often base their decisions on semantically irrelevant phrases, raising concerns about their reasoning capabilities. 

## 3 THE CHAIN OF COMPUTATION (COC) A RCHITECTURE 

Scratchpads (Nye et al., 2021) and chain-of-thought (COT) prompting (Wei et al., 2022) share a common underlying principle: simplifying multi-step reasoning by decomposing a problem into a sequence of next-token predictions across multiple steps. For example, if the goal is to move from room A to room B and the connecting door is locked, the first step is to pick up the key. Instead of producing the entire solution in a single pass, the reasoning process is decomposed into meaningful intermediate steps that are explicitly written to the context window. This suggests the following intuition: LMs may struggle to reliably update their internal state, but they can effectively update an external state, the context window, over long sequences. However, although updating the context is relatively easy, Liu et al. (2024) show—using the Needle in a Haystack test—that as the context window grows, it becomes increasingly difficult for the LM to retrieve relevant information embedded within it. This further suggests that even if the model explicitly writes all variables required for decision-making into the context at each step, it may still fail to reliably retain and utilize them as the complexity of the planning problem increases. This limitation is also observed in Searchformer (Lehnert et al., 2024), which trains an LM on planning traces generated by the A* algorithm (Hart et al., 1968). The LM learns to imitate the execution of A* for each problem instance. The entire accumulated context is provided to the LM at every step, causing the context window to grow throughout the planning process. Consequently, the performance degrades as task complexity increases, as demonstrated by the increase in maze size (see Figure 2 in Lehnert et al. (2024)). We propose a Chain of Computation (COC) architecture, which leverages an LM as its core com-ponent for solving problems requiring multi-step reasoning. The planning procedure is formulated as an iterative loop, where each iteration corresponds to a single prompt to the LM, following its standard autoregressive execution. The LM’s context window is loaded from an external memory called the structured context window (SCW) . Initially, the SCW is based on an append-only tape, where it can read from any location but only append to the end of the tape. At each iteration, the LM receives the current instruction and produces three outputs: (i) the new instructions to be written to the SCW, (ii) the actions to be executed at the current step, and (iii) a pointer indicating the next instruction to be processed. To mitigate performance degradation caused by long context windows, the LM receives only the portion of the SCW specified by the pointer, containing all information required to execute the current instruction. In order to be successful, the LM must potentially learn: • the planning policy, π(a | s), which generates the next action in the policy for a given state; • the world model, T (s′ | s, a ), which generates the next state; and • the arithmetic operations required to update the pointers. To train the LM, we present each instruction together with its corresponding target independently of the other instructions in the plan. The goal is that, by providing a finite set of training instructions covering all three modules, the LM learns to generalize each module to previously unseen inputs. The pointer mechanism not only provides concise inputs to the LM but also significantly reduces computational cost. Consider a planning task that requires generating noutput tokens. In a standard autoregressive setup (e.g. Lehnert et al. (2024)), the model processes an input whose size grows from nprompt to nprompt + noutput as more tokens are generated, eventually approaching the max-imum context length. In contrast, the proposed pointer mechanism ensures that the model receives inputs of approximately constant size, determined only by the current instruction being processed. As a result, even for long planning horizons, the computational cost per iteration remains nearly con-stant. A detailed empirical comparison illustrating this effect and the growth of the context window throughout planning is presented in Section I. 5Preprint 

Algorithm 1 COC: Chain of Computation Architecture 

Require: Initial state sstart , goal state sgoal , language model M

Ensure: Action sequence Π that transforms sstart to sgoal  

> 1:

Initialize structured context window SCW ← ∅  

> 2:

Initialize action sequence Π ← ∅  

> 3:

Write the initial instruction S OLVE (sstart , s goal ) to SCW [0]  

> 4:

Set pointer p ← 0 

> 5:

while p̸ = −1 do  

> 6:

Xp ← READ (SCW, p ) ▷ Read the instruction at p 

> 7:

(Inew , Anew , p next ) ← M (Xp) ▷ Generate new instruction, action, and next pointer  

> 8:

WRITE (SCW, Inew ) ▷ Write generated instruction to the SCW  

> 9:

Π ← Π ◦ A new ▷ Append the new action to the action sequence  

> 10:

p ← pnext  

> 11:

end while  

> 12:

return ΠA B C  

> 5
> 4
> 3
> 2
> 1A
> C
> F
> B
> E
> D6
> 3
> 5
> 2
> 4
> 1

Figure 2: Planning domains used in our experiments. Left: Tower of Hanoi with n = 5 disks. Middle: Blocksworld with n = 6 blocks. Right: Pancake Puzzle with n = 6 pancakes. An overview of the architecture is provided in Algorithm 1. At the beginning of the planning proce-dure, the task is placed at position 0 in the SCW, and the pointer is initialized to 0. At each iteration, the LM receives the current instruction and generates a new instruction, the next action, and the pointer to the next instruction to be executed. The new instruction is then written to the location specified within the instruction itself. The generated action is appended to the action sequence, and the process continues until the pointer becomes −1, indicating that no instructions remain to be executed. Upon termination, the accumulated action sequence is returned as the solution path. Our approach is conceptually related to the looped transformers framework (Giannou et al., 2023), as both employ an iterative loop to emulate the autoregressive decoding process of LMs. However, there are two key differences. First, in the looped transformers framework, the LM weights are hard-coded rather than learned. Second, that work does not provide empirical validation of the per-formance of such hard-coded weights, as doing so would require a detailed finite-precision analysis. Moreover, it remains unclear how this approach can be extended to larger pretrained models. Our approach is also different from recent methods that compress or summarize large context windows in long-horizon tasks (Li et al., 2026c; Chen et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2026). In these approaches, the summarization is performed either by another LM or through learned parameters called, soft tokens, both of which may introduce information loss or approximation errors. In contrast, COC uses a well-defined pointer mechanism to restrict the visible context, requiring no learning and introducing no additional approximation error. 

## 4 PLANNING DOMAINS 

In this section, we present the planning domains used to evaluate COC. We consider two domains that are commonly used in recent work (Shojaee et al., 2025; Pallagani et al., 2023; Katz et al., 2024): Tower of Hanoi (TOH) and BlocksWorld. In addition, we include the Pancake Puzzle (Gates & Papadimitriou, 1979) as a classical combinatorial planning domain. These domains are illustrated in Figure 2 and described below. For each domain, we show how the planning algorithm can be formulated as prompt–target pairs with pointers, enabling the training of the LM. 6Preprint 

Tower of Hanoi (TOH). The Tower of Hanoi is a classical planning problem that requires long-horizon planning and strict adherence to constraints. The environment consists of three pegs and 

n disks of distinct sizes, initially stacked on a single peg in decreasing order of size (largest at the bottom, smallest at the top). The objective is to move the entire stack to a target peg while satisfying two constraints: (i) only one disk can be moved at a time, and (ii) a larger disk can never be placed on top of a smaller disk. Following prior work, we define the problem complexity in terms of the number of disks n, as the optimal solution length grows exponentially with n (i.e., 2n − 1 moves). The standard recursive planning algorithm for TOH is based on the following decomposition. To move n disks from source peg s to destination peg d using auxiliary peg a, one first moves the top 

n − 1 disks from s to a, then moves disk n from s to d, and finally moves the n − 1 disks from a to 

d. Formally, if H ANOI (n, s, d, a ) denotes the solution procedure, then HANOI (n, s, d, a ) = HANOI (n − 1, s, a, d ) ◦ Move (n, s, d ) ◦ HANOI (n − 1, a, d, s ),

with the base case HANOI (1 , s, d, a ) = Move (1 , s, d ).

Thus, the recursive algorithm alternates between two types of operations: recursive subproblem expansion and primitive disk moves. We represent this procedure as a stack of instructions. Each prompt to the LM corresponds to either a call or a move instruction. A complete example illustrating how the context window evolves with all prompts and LM outputs is provided in Appendix B. The TOH domain is unique in that the state does not need to be explicitly represented. The recursive algorithm can just generate the list of actions used to solve the problem. 

Blocksworld. Blocksworld is a classical planning domain that requires reasoning over long se-quences of actions with constraints on how blocks can be moved. The environment consists of a set of n distinct blocks arranged in stacks on a tabletop. The goal is to transform an initial block con-figuration into a given target configuration. At each step, only a clear block—i.e., a block with no other block on top of it—can be moved, and it can be placed either on the table or on top of another clear block. The complexity is defined by the number of blocks n and grows linearly with n, since a simple strategy yields a solution with at most 2( n − 1) moves: first unstack the blocks onto the table using n − 1 moves, and then stack them into the goal configuration using another n − 1 moves. We formulate this strategy as B LOCKS WORLD (n, s, g ), where n is the number of blocks, s is the current state (equal to the start configuration initially), and g is the goal configuration. The plan is divided into two equal-length phases: unstacking and stacking. The procedure begins with the un-stacking phase using the initial prompt type=unstacking CALL (n, s, g ). The stacking phase then begins with the prompt type=stacking CALL (n, [] , g ), where the empty start state indi-cates the current configuration. A complete example illustrating how the context window evolves with all prompts and LM outputs is provided in Appendix C. 

Pancake Puzzle. The Pancake Puzzle is a classical combinatorial planning problem that requires sequential decision-making under constrained actions that change the arrangement of pancakes. The environment consists of a stack of n pancakes of distinct sizes in some initial order. The goal is to transform the stack into the sorted order, with the largest pancake at the bottom and the smallest at the top. The only allowed action is a prefix flip: at each step, the top k pancakes, for some 

1 < k ≤ n, can be flipped, reversing their order. We define the problem complexity in terms of the number of pancakes n, as the number of possible configurations grows factorially with n. A simple strategy for solving the Pancake Puzzle is to repeatedly apply the following process until no unsorted pancake remains: first identify the largest unsorted pancake and flip the prefix ending at its current position to bring it to the top; then flip the prefix ending at its target position to place it correctly. Using this strategy, any instance can be solved in at most 2( n − 1) moves, since the last pancake is automatically placed correctly after sorting the previous n − 1 pancakes. We formulate the planning problem as P ANCAKE (n, s, g ) to replicate this process with the LM, where n is the number of pancakes, s is the start configuration, and g is the goal configuration, which is fixed and identical across all problem instances. The planning procedure begins with the initial prompt pointer = 0 CALL (s, g ). At each step, the LM generates 7Preprint 

pointer = i CALL (s, g ) →



Px, FLIP (cur( Px)) ,s′, FLIP (goal( Px)) ,s′′ , pointer = i + 1 CALL (s′′ , g )

where Px is the largest unsorted pancake, cur( Px) is its current position in s, goal( Px) is its target position in g, and s′ and s′′ are the states after the first and second flips, respectively. A complete example, including all prompts and LM outputs, is provided in Appendix D. The Pancake Puzzle has the most complicated state transitions of the domains considered in this paper. Learning the world model requires learning how to reverse a set of pancakes from the state representation, and the policy requires finding the maximum unsorted pancake. 

## 5 EXPERIMENTS 

In this section, we aim to answer the following key questions: (1) Can COC reliably solve the planning tasks considered in this work? (2) Can COC generalize to unseen problem instances within the same domains on which it was trained? (3) How does the pointer mechanism improve efficiency and reduce computational cost? To answer these questions, we design a set of experiments across the planning domains considered in this work. We use a decoder-only transformer as the LM within the COC architecture. The model is trained from scratch in an autoregressive manner using the standard next-token prediction loss over all tokens, including the prompt. We use two different approaches to construct the training datasets for the planning domains. For TOH, we generate all prompt–target pairs for each value of n disks. During training, the model is exposed only to a random subset of these pairs, while the remaining pairs are held out for evaluation. For the Pancake Puzzle and BlocksWorld, we generate complete prompt–target pairs only for a fixed number of randomly sampled problem instances for each value of n. More details and the hyperparameters used for each puzzle are provided in Appendix A. 5.1 ACCURACY UNDER INCREASING COMPLEXITY 

A key requirement of a planner is to maintain its performance as the complexity of the problem increases. To evaluate this property, we test COC across different complexity levels in each environ-ment. For BlocksWorld and the Pancake Puzzle, we generate 500 uniformly random configurations for each value of n from 5 to 40 for training. Each configuration consists of a random start state; for BlocksWorld, the goal state is also sampled uniformly at random for each instance. During test-ing, we evaluate the model on 50 randomly sampled configurations for each n, all disjoint from the training set. The model achieves 100% success across all test instances in both environments. A natural question is whether 50 test configurations are sufficient to represent performance at each complexity level. To answer this, we perform an exhaustive evaluation at n = 8 over all 8! = 40 ,320 

possible start configurations. In BlocksWorld, COC successfully solves 100% of test configurations. In the Pancake Puzzle, it fails in only one case, achieving a success rate of 99 .99% . This failure occurs when the pancakes are already sorted, in which case the correct behavior is to generate no action. Since the LM never observes an already sorted configuration during training, it treats this case as an unsorted instance and attempts to identify the largest unsorted pancake. Consequently, it generates two flips of the smallest pancake before terminating the plan. These actions leave the state unchanged, and the goal state is still reached. Therefore, this case does not reflect a failure of the planning policy itself, but rather the generation of a plan containing unnecessary actions. 

Towers of Hanoi For TOH, we require a different experimental setup since there is only a sin-gle problem instance for each value of n disks. We train the model on prompt–target pairs for 

n = 1 to n = 15 disks, holding out a fraction of the pairs uniformly at random to evaluate generalization. We gradually increase the hold-out percentage from 5% to 50% . For each hold-out level, we use a distinct set of five random seeds so that the held-out pairs differ as much as possible across runs. The success rates are shown in Figure 3, while the detailed results, in-cluding the values of n for which the planner fails and the corresponding failure steps for one 8Preprint s5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 

> Holdout
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> Success rate (%)

Figure 3: Mean success rate on TOH across ran-dom hold-out percentages of the training data, with error bars showing ± one standard devia-tion over five random seeds. representative run from each hold-out setting, are provided in Appendix H. As expected, the av-erage success rate decreases as the holdout per-centage increases, dropping from 92% at a 5% holdout rate to 41% at 50%. Nevertheless, even with 35% of the data held out, COC achieves an average success rate of 70% , substantially out-performing recent methods (Shojaee et al., 2025; Malach et al., 2026), which employ much larger pretrained reasoning LMs. Also, a closer inspec-tion of the failure cases reveals that most failures occur when the planner encounters unseen disk indices or unseen instruction numbers. In these cases, the failure is typically caused by incorrect arithmetic operations when updating the pointer or directing it to the next instruction, something we return to shortly. 

Extended BlocksWorld We consider a more general variant of BlocksWorld. In the standard setting, the initial configuration consists of a single stack of blocks. We extend this to allow multiple stacks in the initial state, introducing a broader set of combinatorial configurations, and refer to this setting as Extended BlocksWorld . A complete example illustrating how the context window evolves with all prompts and LM outputs is provided in Appendix E. Similar to the standard BlocksWorld setting, we use 500 randomly sampled start–goal configuration pairs for each value of n from 5 to 

40 for training. At test time, we evaluate the model on 50 randomly sampled configurations per n

that are disjoint from the training set. In this extended setting, it is not possible to cover all stack configurations during training, and the model does not observe all possible numbers of stacks for each value of n. Despite this, COC successfully solves all test configurations for every value of n

except two configurations for n = 35 and n = 36 , achieving a success rate of 99 .89% . This result demonstrates that the model learns the underlying planning strategy and generalizes across different stack configurations, regardless of how the blocks are distributed among the stacks. Table 1: Success rates (%) across selected complexity levels ( n blocks or pancakes) and numbers of complete training instances. Environment Training Instances n

6 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 BlocksWorld 500 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 300 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 30 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 92 5 94 80 100 76 78 54 30 0Extended BlocksWorld 500 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 100 300 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 98 30 100 100 100 100 100 98 100 94 5 94 88 78 72 52 38 16 2Pancake 500 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 300 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 30 98 96 100 100 100 98 100 82 5 78 66 74 54 64 48 20 09Preprint 5.2 SCALING POLICY LEARNING AND GENERALIZATION WITH TRAINING DATA 

In the previous section, we showed that the planner achieves high success rates across all three plan-ning domains. We now investigate how much training data is required to maintain this performance. Starting from 500 complete training instances for each value of n, we progressively reduce the training set size and evaluate the resulting performance on the test set, while keeping the model ar-chitecture and training setup fixed. A summary of the results is shown in Table 1, while the complete results are provided in Appendix H. For BlocksWorld, no failures occur until the number of training instances is reduced to 100. Afew failure cases begin to appear at higher complexity levels when using 30 training instances. As the number of training instances decreases further, the failure rate gradually increases with n, such that with only 5 training instances, COC successfully solves only a small number of test cases at larger values of n. In Extended BlocksWorld, we observe a similar trend, although failures appear at higher training set sizes compared to the standard setting. This behavior is expected, since gen-eralizing across different numbers of stacks requires more training configurations than the standard single-stack setting. Nevertheless, even with only 30 training instances, COC achieves higher suc-cess rates in both BlocksWorld variants than those reported for much larger pretrained reasoning LMs in previous work (Shojaee et al., 2025; Valmeekam et al., 2023; Katz et al., 2024). For the Pancake Puzzle, the planner exhibits almost no failures down to 100 training instances. Below this threshold, the number of failures increases steadily as the amount of training data decreases. With only 5 training instances, the planner fails on most test cases across all values of n. This stronger degradation compared to BlocksWorld is expected, since the Pancake Puzzle additionally requires the model to learn reversal operations and the corresponding state transformations. 5.3 ISOLATING PLANNING FROM ARITHMETIC IN TOH The results in Figure 3 show that holding out the same percentage of training data can lead to different levels of generalization depending on which prompt–target pairs are ex-cluded from training. Motivated by this finding, we design a second experiment to 21 23 25 27 29 211 213 215                   

> Solution Length for last n(log scale)
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 120
> 140
> 160
> # Training Instances
> n= 1 n= 2
> n= 3
> n= 4
> n= 5
> n= 6
> n= 7
> n= 8
> n= 9
> n= 10
> n= 11
> n= 12
> n= 13
> n= 14
> n= 15

Figure 4: Planning instructions required for training to solve TOH instances up to disk count n. The x-axis is logarithmic. investigate the minimum amount of additional train-ing data required as the number of disks increases in order to maintain a 100% success rate. For this experiment, we separate the planning and arithmetic operations so that they are handled independently. The prompt is passed to the language model us-ing symbolic placeholders, and the model gener-ates target instructions containing symbolic arith-metic expressions rather than explicit numerical val-ues. These symbolic expressions, along with the cur-rent values of the symbols, are then passed to an arithmetic module to obtain the updated numerical values. The arithmetic module can either be another language model trained to perform arithmetic opera-tions or an external tool invoked to execute the com-putations. The overall procedure for each planning iteration, together with example prompt–target pairs generated by the language model, is shown in Appendix F. In Figure 4, we show the number of prompt–target pairs that are added to the training set as the number of disks n increases in order to maintain a 100% success rate for all values of n up to that complexity level. In this experiment, we use the same LM architecture as in the previous exper-iments, while arithmetic operations are handled by a built-in module that computes the required numerical values exactly. As shown in the figure, the solution length grows exponentially with the number of disks, while the amount of additional training data required to maintain perfect perfor-mance grows only linearly. This stark contrast provides further evidence that the primary source of failures observed in the original TOH experiments is not the planning procedure itself, but rather inaccuracies in the arithmetic operations required to update the pointers. 10 Preprint 

## 6 DISCUSSION 

When comparing the results in Figures 3 and 4, we observe that the planning policy itself is not the main source of failure. Rather, the pointer mechanism appears to be the component preventing the planner from achieving perfect success across all TOH instances. This raises a natural question: are pointers necessary for TOH at all? In TOH, the planner only needs to access the instruction at the top of the SCW at each step and append new instructions to the top of the SCW. At no point does it need to access an arbitrary location in the SCW. In other words, the planner only requires push 

and pop operations to interact with the SCW. This structure resembles a deterministic pushdown automaton (PDA) (Hopcroft et al., 2001), where a finite-state machine is equipped with a LIFO external memory and can push to or pop from the stack. The formulation of the TOH planner as a PDA, together with a complete example of the correspond-ing prompt–target pairs, is provided in Appendix G. We train a new model on prompt–target pairs constructed using the PDA structure for TOH, following the same training setup as in the previous experiments. In this experiment, the dataset is generated for problem instances with n = 1 to n = 20 

disks. Among all generated prompt–target pairs, only unique pairs are retained, while duplicate in-structions are removed. Then, 15% of the resulting dataset is selected uniformly at random and held out for testing. At test time, the planner solves 100% of problem instances for n = 1 to n = 20 ,providing further evidence that the underlying planning policy is successfully learned by the LM. The PDA formulation can also be applied to other domains, as they require the same stack access operations. However, since the plan length does not grow exponentially in those domains, pointer operations are not the same challenge as in TOH. Therefore, we do not repeat the experiments for those domains. 

## 7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

In this work, we investigated the gap between the theoretical computational power of transformer-based language models and their empirical performance on planning tasks. We proposed the Chain of Computation (COC) architecture, in which a language model operates inside an iterative plan-ning loop and interacts with a structured context window (SCW) through a pointer mechanism. Rather than generating complete plans in a single pass, the model learns to execute local planning instructions and iteratively update the SCW. We evaluated the proposed approach on three planning domains: Tower of Hanoi (TOH), BlocksWorld, and the Pancake Puzzle. Across BlocksWorld and the Pancake Puzzle, we found that relatively small language models trained from scratch can learn planning policies and generalize from a surprisingly small number of training instances. In both domains, COC achieves near-perfect success rates on unseen problem instances. In TOH, COC gen-eralizes to unseen instructions and achieves an average success rate of 92% . Our analysis of failure cases in TOH provides an important insight into the limitations of language models in planning. We find that the primary source of failures is not an inability to learn the planning policy itself, but rather inaccuracies in arithmetic operations caused by previously unseen numbers. By separating planning from arithmetic and performing the latter symbolically, we show that perfect performance can be maintained while the amount of additional training data required grows only linearly, even though the planning length grows exponentially as the problem complexity increases. We later show that planning for TOH does not require pointers and that the only operations needed on the SCW are push and pop. Consequently, the planner can be formulated as a deterministic pushdown automaton (PDA). This PDA formulation eliminates the need for pointer operations and achieves a perfect success rate on all TOH problem instances up to 20 disks. Several directions remain for future work. First, we aim to theoretically investigate how the pointer mechanism affects the probability of success compared to the conventional approach of providing the entire accumulated context to the language model. Second, we aim to investigate whether COC can accurately learn and execute more sophisticated planning algorithms. Finally, we will further investigate how the SCW architecture impacts learning and generalization. 11 Preprint 

## REFERENCES 

Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023. Mohamed Aghzal, Erion Plaku, and Ziyu Yao. Can large language models be good path planners? a benchmark and investigation on spatial-temporal reasoning. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on LLM Agents , 2024. Alfred V. Aho and Jeffrey D. Ullman. Syntax directed translations and the pushdown assembler. 

Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 3(1):37–56, 1969. Vaishak Belle and Gary Marcus. The future is neuro-symbolic: Where has it been, and where is it going? Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 40(48):40954–40961, Mar. 2026. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v40i48.42130. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ AAAI/article/view/42130 .Satwik Bhattamishra, Arkil Patel, and Navin Goyal. On the computational power of transformers and its implications in sequence modeling. In Proceedings of the 24th Conference on Computa-tional Natural Language Learning , pp. 455–475, 2020. Bernd Bohnet, Azade Nova, Aaron T Parisi, Kevin Swersky, Katayoon Goshvadi, Hanjun Dai, Dale Schuurmans, Noah Fiedel, and Hanie Sedghi. Exploring and benchmarking the planning capabil-ities of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.13094 , 2024. Bernd Bohnet, Michael C Mozer, Kevin Swersky, Wil Cunningham, Aaron Parisi, Kathleen Kenealy, and Noah Fiedel. Analysis of optimality of large language models on planning problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.02910 , 2026. Tom B. Brown et al. Language models are few-shot learners. NeurIPS , 2020. Lu Chen, Yuxuan Huang, Yixing Li, Dongrui Liu, Qihan Ren, Kun Kuang, Zilong Zheng, Quanshi Zhang, et al. Can llms reason soundly in law? auditing inference patterns for legal judgment. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) ,2026. Mark Chen et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 , 2021. Shaoshen Chen, Yangning Li, Zishan Xu, Yongqin Zeng, Shunlong Wu, Xinshuo Hu, Zifei Shan, Xin Su, Jiwei Tang, Yinghui Li, et al. Dast: Context-aware compression in llms via dynamic allocation of soft tokens. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pp. 20544–20552, 2025. Mattia Chiari, Luca Putelli, Nicholas Rossetti, Ivan Serina, and Alfonso Emilio Gerevini. On plan-ning through llms. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling , volume 35, pp. 377–385, 2025. Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168 , 2021. Augusto B Corrˆ ea, Andr´ e G Pereira, and Jendrik Seipp. Classical planning with llm-generated heuristics: Challenging the state of the art with python code. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:42070–42108, 2026. Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang Lorraine Li, Liwei Jiang, Bill Yuchen Lin, Sean Welleck, Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, et al. Faith and fate: Limits of transformers on compositionality. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:70293– 70332, 2023. Ying Fan, Yilun Du, Kannan Ramchandran, and Kangwook Lee. Looped transformers for length generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pp. 14502–14520, 2025. 12 Preprint Kanishk Gandhi, Denise Lee, Gabriel Grand, Muxin Liu, Winson Cheng, Archit Sharma, and Noah D Goodman. Stream of search (sos): Learning to search in language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.03683 , 2024. William H. Gates and Christos H. Papadimitriou. Bounds for sorting by prefix reversal. 

Discrete Mathematics , 27(1):47–57, 1979. ISSN 0012-365X. doi: https://doi.org/10. 1016/0012-365X(79)90068-2. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/0012365X79900682 .Robert Geirhos, J¨ orn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel, Matthias Bethge, and Felix A Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature Machine Intelligence , 2(11):665–673, 2020. Angeliki Giannou, Shashank Rajput, Jy-yong Sohn, Kangwook Lee, Jason D Lee, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. Looped transformers as programmable computers. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 11398–11442. PMLR, 2023. Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher R´ e. Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured state spaces. 2022. Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 , 2025. Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Wang, and Zhiting Hu. Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 8154–8173, 2023. Peter E Hart, Nils J Nilsson, and Bertram Raphael. A formal basis for the heuristic determination of minimum cost paths. IEEE transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics , 4(2):100–107, 1968. Rishi Hazra, Pedro Zuidberg Dos Martires, and Luc De Raedt. Saycanpay: Heuristic planning with large language models using learnable domain knowledge. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, pp. 20123–20133, 2024. Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. Gaussian error linear units (gelus). arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.08415 , 2016. John E Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani, and Jeffrey D Ullman. Introduction to automata theory, lan-guages, and computation. Acm Sigact News , 32(1):60–65, 2001. Kaiying Hou, David Brandfonbrener, Sham Kakade, Samy Jelassi, and Eran Malach. Universal length generalization with turing programs. 2025. Zhouqi Hua, Wenwei Zhang, Chengqi Lyu, Yuzhe Gu, Songyang Gao, Kuikun Liu, Dahua Lin, and Kai Chen. The imitation game: Turing machine imitator is length generalizable reasoner. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) ,2026. Sukai Huang, Trevor Cohn, and Nir Lipovetzky. Chasing progress, not perfection: Revisiting strate-gies for end-to-end llm plan generation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Auto-mated Planning and Scheduling , volume 35, pp. 204–212, 2025. Binyuan Hui, Jian Yang, Zeyu Cui, Jiaxi Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Lei Zhang, Tianyu Liu, Jiajun Zhang, Bowen Yu, Keming Lu, et al. Qwen2. 5-coder technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12186 ,2024. Hongjian Jiang, Michael Hahn, Georg Zetzsche, and Anthony Widjaja Lin. Softmax transformers are turing-complete. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2026. 13 Preprint Subbarao Kambhampati, Karthik Valmeekam, Lin Guan, Mudit Verma, Kaya Stechly, Siddhant Bhambri, Lucas Paul Saldyt, and Anil B Murthy. Position: Llms can’t plan, but can help planning in llm-modulo frameworks. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. Michael Katz, Harsha Kokel, Kavitha Srinivas, and Shirin Sohrabi. Thought of search: Planning with language models through the lens of efficiency. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:138491–138568, 2024. Harsha Kokel, Michael Katz, Kavitha Srinivas, and Shirin Sohrabi. Acpbench: Reasoning about action, change, and planning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 39, pp. 26559–26568, 2025. Harsha Kokel, Michael Katz, Kavitha Srinivas, and Shirin Sohrabi. Acpbench hard: Unrestrained reasoning about action, change, and planning. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2026. Lucas Lehnert, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Paul McVay, Michael Rabbat, and Yuandong Tian. Be-yond a*: Better LLM planning via search dynamics bootstrapping. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Large Language Model (LLM) Agents , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=rviGTsl0oy .Alex Lewandowski, Marlos C Machado, and Dale Schuurmans. Universal computation is intrinsic to language model decoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.08061 , 2026. Andrew Li, Toryn Klassen, Andrew Wang, Parand A Alamdari, and Sheila McIlraith. Ground-compose-reinforce: Grounding language in agentic behaviours using limited data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:160838–160874, 2026a. Guanghao Li, Wenhao Jiang, Mingfeng Chen, Yan Li, Hao Yu, Shuting Dong, Tao Ren, Ming Tang, and Chun Yuan. Scout: Teaching pre-trained language models to enhance reasoning via flow chain-of-thought. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:95340–95364, 2026b. Qian Li and Yuyi Wang. Constant bit-size transformers are turing complete. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:62273–62292, 2026. Yangning Li, Shaoshen Chen, Yinghui Li, Yankai Chen, Hai-Tao Zheng, Hui Wang, Wenhao Jiang, and Philip S Yu. Admtree: Compressing lengthy context with adaptive semantic trees. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:40389–40415, 2026c. Zhiyuan Li, Hong Liu, Denny Zhou, and Tengyu Ma. Chain of thought empowers transformers to solve inherently serial problems. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Represen-tations , 2024. Jingcong Liang, Shijun Wan, Xuehai Wu, Yitong Li, Qianglong Chen, Duyu Tang, Siyuan Wang, and Zhongyu Wei. Hardcorelogic: Challenging large reasoning models with long-tail logic puzzle games. 2026. Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics (TACL) , 12:157–173, 2024. Xin Liu, Runsong Zhao, Pengcheng Huang, Xinyu Liu, Junyi Xiao, Chunyang Xiao, Tong Xiao, Shengxiang Gao, Zhengtao Yu, and Jingbo Zhu. Autoencoding-free context compression for llms via contextual semantic anchors. 2026. Eran Malach. Auto-regressive next-token predictors are universal learners. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , volume 235 of Proceedings of Ma-chine Learning Research , 2024. Eran Malach, Omid Saremi, Sinead Williamson, Arwen Bradley, Aryo Lotfi, Emmanuel Abbe, Josh Susskind, and Etai Littwin. To infinity and beyond: Tool-use unlocks length generalization in state space models. 2026. 14 Preprint Silin Meng, Yiwei Wang, Cheng-Fu Yang, Nanyun Peng, and Kai-Wei Chang. Llm-a*: Large language model enhanced incremental heuristic search on path planning. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pp. 1087–1102, 2024. Maxwell Nye, Anders J Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, David Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Pang, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, Edward Jiang, et al. Show your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00114 , 2021. Vishal Pallagani, Bharath Muppasani, Keerthiram Murugesan, Francesca Rossi, Biplav Srivastava, Lior Horesh, Francesco Fabiano, and Andrea Loreggia. Understanding the capabilities of large language models for automated planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16151 , 2023. Vishal Pallagani, Bharath Chandra Muppasani, Kaushik Roy, Francesco Fabiano, Andrea Loreggia, Keerthiram Murugesan, Biplav Srivastava, Francesca Rossi, Lior Horesh, and Amit Sheth. On the prospects of incorporating large language models (llms) in automated planning and scheduling (aps). In Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling ,volume 34, pp. 432–444, 2024. Jorge P´ erez, Pablo Barcel´ o, and Javier Marinkovic. Attention is turing-complete. Journal of Ma-chine Learning Research , 22(75):1–35, 2021. John Schultz, Jakub Adamek, Matej Jusup, Marc Lanctot, Michael Kaisers, Sarah Perrin, Daniel Hennes, Jeremy Shar, Cannada Lewis, Anian Ruoss, et al. Mastering board games by external and internal planning with language models. 2025. Dale Schuurmans. Memory augmented large language models are computationally universal. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04589 , 2023. Bilgehan Sel, Ahmad Al-Tawaha, Vanshaj Khattar, Lu Wang, Ruoxi Jia, and Ming Jin. Algorithm of thoughts: Enhancing exploration of ideas in large language models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2024. Bilgehan Sel, Ruoxi Jia, and Ming Jin. Llms can plan only if we tell them. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Neural machine translation of rare words with subword units. In Proceedings of the 54th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: long papers) , pp. 1715–1725, 2016. Dhruv Shah, Michael Robert Equi, Bła˙ zej Osi´ nski, Fei Xia, Brian Ichter, and Sergey Levine. Navi-gation with large language models: Semantic guesswork as a heuristic for planning. In Conference on Robot Learning , pp. 2683–2699. PMLR, 2023. Parshin Shojaee, Seyed Iman Mirzadeh, Keivan Alizadeh, Maxwell Horton, Samy Bengio, and Mehrdad Farajtabar. The illusion of thinking: Understanding the strengths and limitations of reasoning models via the lens of problem complexity. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , volume 38, 2025. Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Sch¨ arli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Denny Zhou, et al. Challenging big-bench tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve them. In Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: ACL 2023 , pp. 13003–13051, 2023. Marcus Tantakoun, Christian Muise, and Xiaodan Zhu. Llms as planning formalizers: A survey for leveraging large language models to construct automated planning models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pp. 25167–25188, 2025. Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Millican, et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 , 2023. 15 Preprint Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 , 2023. Karthik Valmeekam, Matthew Marquez, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati. On the planning abilities of large language models-a critical investigation. Advances in neural informa-tion processing systems , 36:75993–76005, 2023. Hao Wang. Tag systems and lag systems. Mathematische Annalen , 152(1):65–74, 1963. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824–24837, 2022. Gail Weiss, Yoav Goldberg, and Eran Yahav. Thinking like transformers. In International Confer-ence on Machine Learning , pp. 11080–11090. PMLR, 2021. Shijie Wu, Ozan Irsoy, Steven Lu, Vadim Dabravolski, Mark Dredze, Sebastian Gehrmann, Prab-hanjan Kambadur, David Rosenberg, and Gideon Mann. Bloomberggpt: A large language model for finance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17564 , 2023. Yijia Xiao, Edward Sun, Tong Chen, Fang Wu, Di Luo, and Wei Wang. Trading-r1: Financial trading with llm reasoning via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.11420 , 2025. John Yang, Carlos Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:50528–50652, 2024. Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems , 36:11809–11822, 2023. Zexuan Zhong, Tao Lei, and Danqi Chen. Training language models with memory augmentation. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pp. 5657–5673, 2022. Hattie Zhou, Gareth Bradley, Vantshaj Khattar, Seyed Iman Mirzadeh, Maxwell Horton, Samy Ben-gio, and Mehrdad Farajtabar. What algorithms can transformers learn? a study in length general-ization. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. 16 Preprint 

# Appendix 

## CONTENTS 

A Experimental Setup 17 B Tower of Hanoi: Complete Example 18 C Blocksworld: Complete Example 20 D Pancake Puzzle: Complete Example 22 E Extended Blocksworld: Complete Example 24 F Tower of Hanoi: Complete Planning-Only Example 26 G PDA for Tower of Hanoi: Complete Example 28 H Extended Training Scaling Results 30 I Context Window Growth during Planning 30 

## A EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 

In this section, we describe the tokenization process and the LM structure. For each environment, we convert every instruction example from training into a prompt–target language modeling sequence. Each dataset record contains a textual prompt p and a textual target y. We train a separate tokenizer for each environment using only the concatenated strings 

p || \ n || y, 

where \n is the prompt–target separator. The tokenizer is a Unicode, non-byte-level BPE tokenizer (Sennrich et al., 2016) with a Metaspace pre-tokenizer and decoder. The BPE vocabulary is ini-tialized with the set of characters appearing in the corresponding environment’s prompt–target text, together with the special tokens [PAD] , [BOS] , [EOS] , and [UNK] . We do not train the tokenizer on metadata fields such as problem size, step index, or configuration identifiers; only the prompt and target strings are used. After tokenizer training, each record is encoded as 

x = [ BOS ] || tok( p) || tok( \n) || tok( y) || [EOS ].

We store the token index at which the target portion begins. During training, the model is optimized with next-token prediction, but loss terms corresponding to prompt reconstruction and padding to-kens are masked out. 

Model architecture. All experiments use a decoder-only Transformer language model. Given an input sequence of token ids (x1, . . . , x T ), the model forms the initial hidden states by summing learned token embeddings and learned absolute positional embeddings: 

x(0)  

> i

= Etok (xi) + Epos (i), i = 1 , . . . , T. 

The sequence is then processed by L identical pre-normalization Transformer blocks. Each block consists of causal multi-head self-attention followed by a position-wise feed-forward network, with residual connections around both sub-layers. Let LN denote layer normalization, MHA denote 17 Preprint Token ids  

> (B,T)

Model        

> Token
> Embeddings
> +
> Position
> Embedngs
> Layer
> Normalization LM head Output logits
> (B,T,|𝒱 |)

…    

> Transformer Block 1
> Layer
> Normalization
> Causal self-attention
> Head 1 …Head h
> Layer
> Normalization
> Feed-Forward
> Network
> …
> …
> +
> Input to the Block 2
> +
> Transformer Block L
> Layer
> Normalization
> Causal self-attention
> Head 1 …Head h
> Layer
> Normalization
> Feed-Forward
> Network
> …
> …
> +
> +
> Output of the Block L-1

Figure 5: Decoder-only Transformer architecture used as the language model within the planner. Table 2: Model and tokenization hyperparameters used for each environment. 

Hyperparameter Tower of Hanoi Blocksworld Pancake 

Tokenizer Unicode BPE Unicode BPE Unicode BPE BPE vocabulary size 300 300 300 BPE min frequency 10 5 5BOS/EOS tokens Yes Yes Yes Maximum sequence length 128 256 512 Trainable parameters 10.8 M 25.49 M 25.62 M Hidden size dmodel 384 512 512 Transformer blocks L 6 8 8Attention heads 6 8 8Attention head dimension 64 64 64 Feed-forward dimension dff 1536 2048 2048 Dropout 0.1 0.1 0.1 Input/output embedding tying Yes Yes Yes causal multi-head self-attention, and FFN denote the position-wise feed-forward network. Then the 

ℓ-th block is given by 

˜x(ℓ) = x(ℓ−1) + MHA 



LN( x(ℓ−1) )



,x(ℓ) = ˜ x(ℓ) + FFN 



LN(˜ x(ℓ))



.

The attention mask is strictly causal, so position i can attend only to positions j ≤ i; padding positions are additionally masked. The feed-forward network is a two-layer MLP with a GELU nonlinearity (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016). After the final Transformer block, we apply a final layer normalization and a linear language-modeling head to obtain logits over the tokenizer vocabulary. An overview of the model architecture is shown in Figure 5. The model hyperparameters used for each puzzle environment are reported in Table 2, and the corresponding training hyperparameters are reported in Table 3. 

## B TOWER OF HANOI : C OMPLETE EXAMPLE 

In this section, we provide a complete execution of the planning procedure for solving HANOI (3 , s, d, a ), including all prompts and the corresponding responses expected from the LM. The step variable indicates the order of execution from initialization to termination. Each prompt 18 Preprint Table 3: Training hyperparameters used for each environment. 

Hyperparameter Tower of Hanoi Blocksworld Pancake 

Training sequence length 128 256 512 Batch size 64 32 32 Validation fraction 0.05 0.05 0.05 Training configurations per n — 500 500 Epochs 100 100 100 Maximum training steps 50,000 100,000 100,000 Learning rate 3 × 10 −4 3 × 10 −4 3 × 10 −4

Weight decay 0.1 0.1 0.1 Gradient clipping 1.0 1.0 1.0 Warmup steps 2,000 2,000 2,000 Optimizer AdamW AdamW AdamW Learning-rate schedule Cosine decay Cosine decay Cosine decay Evaluation interval 1,000 steps 1,000 steps 1,000 steps Logging interval 100 steps 100 steps 100 steps and target also includes NEXT ID , which specifies the current number of instructions in the stack and serves as the index for inserting newly generated instructions during decomposition. 

Example: Full Prompt–Target Trace for Tower of Hanoi with n = 3                                                                                 

> Step 1 Prompt
> PTR=0 NEXT ID=1 INSTR[0] CALL n=3 src=1 dst=3 aux=2 prev=-1
> Target
> APPEND[1] CALL n=2 src=2 dst=3 aux=1 prev=-1 APPEND[2] MOVE d=3 src=1 dst=3 prev=1 APPEND[3] CALL n=2 src=1 dst=2 aux=3 prev=2 PTR=3 NEXT ID=4
> Step 2 Prompt
> PTR=3 NEXT ID=4 INSTR[3] CALL n=2 src=1 dst=2 aux=3 prev=2
> Target
> APPEND[4] CALL n=1 src=3 dst=2 aux=1 prev=2 APPEND[5] MOVE d=2 src=1 dst=2 prev=4 APPEND[6] CALL n=1 src=1 dst=3 aux=2 prev=5 PTR=6 NEXT ID=7
> Step 3 Prompt
> PTR=6 NEXT ID=7 INSTR[6] CALL n=1 src=1 dst=3 aux=2 prev=5
> Target
> OUTPUT Move disk 1from 1to 3PTR=5 NEXT ID=7
> Step 4 Prompt
> PTR=5 NEXT ID=7 INSTR[5] MOVE d=2 src=1 dst=2 prev=4
> Target
> OUTPUT Move disk 2from 1to 2PTR=4 NEXT ID=7

19 Preprint 

Step 5 Prompt 

PTR=4 NEXT ID=7 INSTR[4] CALL n=1 src=3 dst=2 aux=1 prev=2 

Target 

OUTPUT Move disk 1 from 3 to 2PTR=2 NEXT ID=7 

Step 6 Prompt 

PTR=2 NEXT ID=7 INSTR[2] MOVE d=3 src=1 dst=3 prev=1 

Target 

OUTPUT Move disk 3 from 1 to 3PTR=1 NEXT ID=7 

Step 7 Prompt 

PTR=1 NEXT ID=7 INSTR[1] CALL n=2 src=2 dst=3 aux=1 prev=-1 

Target 

APPEND[7] CALL n=1 src=1 dst=3 aux=2 prev=-1 APPEND[8] MOVE d=2 src=2 dst=3 prev=7 APPEND[9] CALL n=1 src=2 dst=1 aux=3 prev=8 PTR=9 NEXT ID=10 

Step 8 Prompt 

PTR=9 NEXT ID=10 INSTR[9] CALL n=1 src=2 dst=1 aux=3 prev=8 

Target 

OUTPUT Move disk 1 from 2 to 1PTR=8 NEXT ID=10 

Step 9 Prompt 

PTR=8 NEXT ID=10 INSTR[8] MOVE d=2 src=2 dst=3 prev=7 

Target 

OUTPUT Move disk 2 from 2 to 3PTR=7 NEXT ID=10 

Step 10 Prompt 

PTR=7 NEXT ID=10 INSTR[7] CALL n=1 src=1 dst=3 aux=2 prev=-1 

Target 

OUTPUT Move disk 1 from 1 to 3PTR=-1 NEXT ID=10 

## C BLOCKSWORLD : C OMPLETE EXAMPLE 

In this section, we provide a complete example of all prompts and their corresponding targets re-quired to solve a Blocksworld problem with n = 6 blocks. The initial and goal configurations are sampled uniformly at random from all possible permutations. The step variable indicates the order of prompt–target pairs from initialization until the problem is solved. The language model only observes the prompt and generates the target for the next iteration. Whenever the start and goal configurations are identical, the pointer becomes −1, indicating that no instructions remain and that the planning algorithm has reached the goal state. 20 Preprint 

Example: Full Prompt–Target Trace for Blocksworld with n = 6 

Initial stack: 

[B1, B 6, B 2, B 5, B 4, B 3] 

Goal stack: 

[B5, B 3, B 6, B 1, B 4, B 2] 

Step 1 Prompt 

PTR=0 CALL type=unstacking start=[B1, B6, B2, B5, B4, B3] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B3 APPEND[1] CALL type=unstacking start=[B1, B6, B2, B5, B4] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=1 

Step 2 Prompt 

PTR=1 CALL type=unstacking start=[B1, B6, B2, B5, B4] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B4 APPEND[2] CALL type=unstacking start=[B1, B6, B2, B5] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=2 

Step 3 Prompt 

PTR=2 CALL type=unstacking start=[B1, B6, B2, B5] &goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B5 APPEND[3] CALL type=unstacking start=[B1, B6, B2] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=3 

Step 4 Prompt 

PTR=3 CALL type=unstacking start=[B1, B6, B2] &goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B2 APPEND[4] CALL type=unstacking start=[B1, B6] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=4 

Step 5 Prompt 

PTR=4 CALL type=unstacking start=[B1, B6] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B6 APPEND[5] CALL type=unstacking start=[B1] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=5 

Step 6 Prompt 

PTR=5 CALL type=unstacking start=[B1] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B1 APPEND[6] CALL type=stacking start=[] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=6 

Step 7 Prompt 

PTR=6 CALL type=stacking start=[] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

21 Preprint 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B5 APPEND[7] CALL type=stacking start=[B5] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=7 

Step 8 Prompt 

PTR=7 CALL type=stacking start=[B5] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B3 APPEND[8] CALL type=stacking start=[B5, B3] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=8 

Step 9 Prompt 

PTR=8 CALL type=stacking start=[B5, B3] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B6 APPEND[9] CALL type=stacking start=[B5, B3, B6] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=9 

Step 10 Prompt 

PTR=9 CALL type=stacking start=[B5, B3, B6] &goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B1 APPEND[10] CALL type=stacking start=[B5, B3, B6, B1] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=10 

Step 11 Prompt 

PTR=10 CALL type=stacking start=[B5, B3, B6, B1] &goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B4 APPEND[11] CALL type=stacking start=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=11 

Step 12 Prompt 

PTR=11 CALL type=stacking start=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4] &goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B2 APPEND[-1] CALL type=stacking start=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=-1 

## D PANCAKE PUZZLE : C OMPLETE EXAMPLE 

In this section, we provide a complete example of all prompts and their corresponding targets re-quired to solve a Pancake Puzzle problem with n = 6 pancakes. The initial configuration is sampled uniformly at random from all possible permutations, while the goal configuration is the same sorted order for all problem instances. The step variable indicates the order of prompt–target pairs from initialization until the problem is solved. At each step, two flip moves are generated to place the next largest unsorted pancake into its correct position. The pointer to the next instruction for the follow-ing iteration is generated in the target and always refers to the next instruction in the context window. 22 Preprint Whenever the start and goal configurations are identical, the pointer becomes −1, indicating that no instructions remain and that the planning algorithm has reached the goal state. 

Example: Full Prompt–Target Trace for Pancake Puzzle with n = 6 

Initial state: 

[P 4, P 6, P 2, P 5, P 1, P 3] 

Goal state: 

[P 1, P 2, P 3, P 4, P 5, P 6] 

Step 1 Prompt 

CALL instruction pointer=0 state=[P4, P6, P2, P5, P1, P3] & goal=[P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6] 

Target 

The largest unsorted pancake is P1. OUTPUT Flip from where P1 is located. State after first flip: [P4, P6, P2, P5, P3, P1]. OUTPUT Flip from where P1 must be located. State after second flip: [P1, P3, P5, P2, P6, P4]. APPEND[1] CALL instruction state=[P1, P3, P5, P2, P6, P4] & goal=[P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6] pointer=1. 

Step 2 Prompt 

CALL instruction pointer=1 state=[P1, P3, P5, P2, P6, P4] & goal=[P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6] 

Target 

The largest unsorted pancake is P2. OUTPUT Flip from where P2 is located. State after first flip: [P1, P3, P5, P4, P6, P2]. OUTPUT Flip from where P2 must be located. State after second flip: [P1, P2, P6, P4, P5, P3]. APPEND[2] CALL instruction state=[P1, P2, P6, P4, P5, P3] & goal=[P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6] pointer=2. 

Step 3 Prompt 

CALL instruction pointer=2 state=[P1, P2, P6, P4, P5, P3] & goal=[P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6] 

Target 

The largest unsorted pancake is P3. OUTPUT Flip from where P3 is located. State after first flip: [P1, P2, P6, P4, P5, P3]. OUTPUT Flip from where P3 must be located. State after second flip: [P1, P2, P3, P5, P4, P6]. APPEND[3] CALL instruction state=[P1, P2, P3, P5, P4, P6] & goal=[P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6] pointer=3. 

Step 4 Prompt 

CALL instruction pointer=3 state=[P1, P2, P3, P5, P4, P6] & goal=[P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6] 

Target 

The largest unsorted pancake is P4. OUTPUT Flip from where P4 is located. State after first flip: [P1, P2, P3, P5, P6, P4]. OUTPUT Flip from where P4 must be located. State after second flip: [P1, P2, P3, P4, P6, P5]. APPEND[4] CALL instruction state=[P1, P2, P3, P4, P6, P5] & goal=[P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6] pointer=4. 

23 Preprint                                                                 

> Step 5 Prompt
> CALL instruction pointer=4 state=[P1, P2, P3, P4, P6, P5] &goal=[P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6]
> Target
> The largest unsorted pancake is P5. OUTPUT Flip from where P5 is located. State after first flip: [P1, P2, P3, P4, P6, P5]. OUTPUT Flip from where P5 must be located. State after second flip: [P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6]. APPEND[-1] CALL instruction state=[P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6] &goal=[P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6] pointer=-1.

## E EXTENDED BLOCKSWORLD : C OMPLETE EXAMPLE 

In this section, we provide a complete example of all prompts and their corresponding targets re-quired to solve an Extended BlocksWorld problem with n = 6 blocks. The initial and goal con-figurations are sampled uniformly at random from all possible permutations. In this setting, the number of stacks is also sampled from 1 to n, with the constraint that no stack is empty. This is because blocks can be placed directly on the table, and an empty stack is equivalent to the table. The step variable indicates the order of prompt–target pairs from initialization until the problem is solved. The language model observes only the prompt and generates the target for the next iteration. Whenever the start and goal configurations are identical, the pointer becomes −1, indicating that no instructions remain and that the planning algorithm has reached the goal state. The language model always attempts to match the goal configuration in the first stack of the start state and leaves the remaining stacks empty. 

Example: Full Prompt–Target Trace for Extended BlocksWorld with n = 6                                                                           

> Initial stacks:
> [[ B1, B 6] ,[B2, B 5, B 4] ,[B3]]
> Goal stack:
> [B5, B 3, B 6, B 1, B 4, B 2]
> Step 1 Prompt
> PTR=0 CALL type=unstacking start=[[B1, B6], [B2, B5, B4], [B3]] &goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2]
> Target
> OUTPUT Move block B3 APPEND[1] CALL type=unstacking start=[[B1, B6], [B2, B5, B4]] &goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=1
> Step 2 Prompt
> PTR=1 CALL type=unstacking start=[[B1, B6], [B2, B5, B4]] &goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2]
> Target
> OUTPUT Move block B4 APPEND[2] CALL type=unstacking start=[[B1, B6], [B2, B5]] &goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=2
> Step 3 Prompt
> PTR=2 CALL type=unstacking start=[[B1, B6], [B2, B5]] &goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2]
> Target

24 Preprint 

OUTPUT Move block B5 APPEND[3] CALL type=unstacking start=[[B1, B6], [B2]] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=3 

Step 4 Prompt 

PTR=3 CALL type=unstacking start=[[B1, B6], [B2]] &goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B2 APPEND[4] CALL type=unstacking start=[[B1, B6]] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=4 

Step 5 Prompt 

PTR=4 CALL type=unstacking start=[[B1, B6]] &goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B6 APPEND[5] CALL type=unstacking start=[[B1]] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=5 

Step 6 Prompt 

PTR=5 CALL type=unstacking start=[[B1]] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B1 APPEND[6] CALL type=stacking start=[] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=6 

Step 7 Prompt 

PTR=6 CALL type=stacking start=[] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B5 APPEND[7] CALL type=stacking start=[[B5]] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=7 

Step 8 Prompt 

PTR=7 CALL type=stacking start=[[B5]] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B3 APPEND[8] CALL type=stacking start=[[B5, B3]] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=8 

Step 9 Prompt 

PTR=8 CALL type=stacking start=[[B5, B3]] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B6 APPEND[9] CALL type=stacking start=[[B5, B3, B6]] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=9 

Step 10 Prompt 

PTR=9 CALL type=stacking start=[[B5, B3, B6]] &goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B1 APPEND[10] CALL type=stacking start=[[B5, B3, B6, B1]] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=10 

25 Preprint 

Step 11 Prompt 

PTR=10 CALL type=stacking start=[[B5, B3, B6, B1]] &goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B4 APPEND[11] CALL type=stacking start=[[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4]] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=11 

Step 12 Prompt 

PTR=11 CALL type=stacking start=[[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4]] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] 

Target 

OUTPUT Move block B2 APPEND[-1] CALL type=stacking start=[[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2]] & goal=[B5, B3, B6, B1, B4, B2] PTR=-1 

## F TOWER OF HANOI : C OMPLETE PLANNING -O NLY EXAMPLE 

In this section, we provide prompt–target pair examples for the experiment designed to separate the planning and arithmetic operations, allowing us to verify whether the failures observed in the original setting are caused by requiring the model to perform both tasks simultaneously. Below, we present the planning operations for values of n ∈ [1 , 3] . The structure of the prompts and targets is identical to that of the original setting; the only difference is that the arithmetic values are represented symbolically rather than being explicitly computed. Figure 6 illustrates how each iteration of the planning loop is processed, from receiving the current prompt to writing the final output on the tape. The arithmetic operations are handled separately, either by a dedicated language model trained for arithmetic reasoning or by an external tool invoked at each iteration. Main Prompt 

PTR=0 NEXT_ID=1 INSTR[0] CALL n=3 src=1 dst=3 aux=2 prev=-1 

> Planning Prompt
> Arithmatic Prompts

INSTR CALL n=3 src=1 dst=3 aux=2 prev=prev 

> APPEND[NEXT_ID] CALL n=2 src=2 dst=3 aux=1 prev=prev
> APPEND[NEXT_ID+1] MOVE d=3 src=1 dst=3 prev=NEXT_ID
> APPEND[NEXT_ID+2] CALL n=2 src=1 dst=2 aux=3 prev=NEXT_ID+1
> PTR=NEXT_ID+2
> NEXT_ID=NEXT_ID+3
> prev=-1
> prev=prev
> NEXT_ID=1
> APPEND[NEXT_ID]
> APPEND[NEXT_ID+1]
> APPEND[NEXT_ID+2]
> prev=NEXT_ID
> prev=NEXT_ID+1
> PTR=NEXT_ID+2
> NEXT_ID=NEXT_ID+3

Arithmatic Model 

or Tool 

> First Prompt
> Second Prompt
> APPEND[ 1] CALL n=2 src=2 dst=3 aux=1 prev= -1
> APPEND[ 2] MOVE d=3 src=1 dst=3 prev= 1
> APPEND[ 3] CALL n=2 src=1 dst=2 aux=3 prev= 2
> PTR= 3
> NEXT_ID= 4
> Final Output on
> the tape

Planning Model 

> Planning Output
> Arithmatic Outputs

Figure 6: One iteration of the planning loop when planning and arithmetic operations are separated. The planning language model generates symbolic instructions, while the arithmetic operations are performed by a dedicated arithmetic module before the updated prompt is written back to the tape. 26 Preprint 

Example: Decomposition Operations for Tower of Hanoi with n ∈ [1 , 3] 

Operation 1 Prompt 

INSTR CALL n=3 src=1 dst=3 aux=2 prev=prev 

Target 

APPEND[NEXT ID] CALL n=2 src=2 dst=3 aux=1 prev=prev APPEND[NEXT ID+1] MOVE d=3 src=1 dst=3 prev=NEXT ID APPEND[NEXT ID+2] CALL n=2 src=1 dst=2 aux=3 prev=NEXT ID+1 PTR=NEXT ID+2 NEXT ID=NEXT ID+3 

Operation 2 Prompt 

INSTR CALL n=2 src=1 dst=2 aux=3 prev=prev 

Target 

APPEND[NEXT ID] CALL n=1 src=3 dst=2 aux=1 prev=prev APPEND[NEXT ID+1] MOVE d=2 src=1 dst=2 prev=NEXT ID APPEND[NEXT ID+2] CALL n=1 src=1 dst=3 aux=2 prev=NEXT ID+1 PTR=NEXT ID+2 NEXT ID=NEXT ID+3 

Operation 3 Prompt 

INSTR CALL n=1 src=1 dst=3 aux=2 prev=prev 

Target 

OUTPUT Move disk 1 from 1 to 3 PTR=prev NEXT ID=NEXT ID 

Operation 4 Prompt 

INSTR MOVE d=2 src=1 dst=2 prev=prev 

Target 

OUTPUT Move disk 2 from 1 to 2 PTR=prev NEXT ID=NEXT ID 

Operation 5 Prompt 

INSTR CALL n=1 src=3 dst=2 aux=1 prev=prev 

Target 

OUTPUT Move disk 1 from 3 to 2 PTR=prev NEXT ID=NEXT ID 

Operation 6 Prompt 

INSTR MOVE d=3 src=1 dst=3 prev=prev 

Target 

OUTPUT Move disk 3 from 1 to 3 PTR=prev NEXT ID=NEXT ID 

Operation 7 Prompt 

INSTR CALL n=2 src=2 dst=3 aux=1 prev=prev 

Target 

APPEND[NEXT ID] CALL n=1 src=1 dst=3 aux=2 prev=prev APPEND[NEXT ID+1] MOVE d=2 src=2 dst=3 prev=NEXT ID APPEND[NEXT ID+2] CALL n=1 src=2 dst=1 aux=3 prev=NEXT ID+1 PTR=NEXT ID+2 NEXT ID=NEXT ID+3 

Operation 8 Prompt 

INSTR CALL n=1 src=2 dst=1 aux=3 prev=prev 

Target 

27 Preprint                       

> OUTPUT Move disk 1 from 2to 1PTR=prev NEXT ID=NEXT ID
> Operation 9 Prompt
> INSTR MOVE d=2 src=2 dst=3 prev=prev
> Target
> OUTPUT Move disk 2from 2to 3PTR=prev NEXT ID=NEXT ID

## G PDA FOR TOWER OF HANOI : C OMPLETE EXAMPLE 

In this section, we first show how the planner for TOH can resemble a PDA. A PDA is formally defined as a tuple 

A = ( Q, Σ, Γ, δ, q 0, Z 0, F ) ,

where: • Q is a finite set of control states; • Σ is the input alphabet, containing the symbols that may appear in the input sequence; • Γ is the stack alphabet, containing the symbols that may be stored in the pushdown stack; • δ is the transition function, which determines the possible next control states and stack updates; • q0 ∈ Q is the initial control state; • Z0 ∈ Γ is the initial stack symbol, typically used as the bottom-of-stack marker; • F ⊆ Q is the set of accepting states. Assume that the number of disks is bounded by a fixed constant N , and let P = {1, 2, 3} denote the set of pegs. We represent a recursive instruction by C(k, s, d, a ), meaning that k disks must be moved from source peg s to destination peg d using auxiliary peg a, and an explicit move instruc-tion by M (k, s, d ), meaning that disk k must be moved from peg s to peg d. The planner can be represented by the deterministic pushdown automaton where 

Q = {qinit , q run , q acc }, F = {qacc },

and 

ΣN = {τn | 1 ≤ n ≤ N },

with τn denoting a Tower-of-Hanoi instance containing n disks. The stack alphabet is 

ΓN = {Z0} ∪ { C(k, s, d, a )} ∪ { M (k, s, d )},

where 1 ≤ k ≤ N , s, d, a ∈ P , the pegs in a call instruction are pairwise distinct, and s̸ = d in a move instruction. Since N is bounded, ΓN is finite. The transition function is defined as follows. 

Initialization: 

δ(qinit , τ n, Z 0) =  qrun , C (n, 1, 3, 2) Z0

.

Recursive expansion, for k > 1:

δ(qrun , ϵ, C (k, s, d, a )) = 



qrun , C (k − 1, s, a, d ) M (k, s, d ) C(k − 1, a, d, s )



.

Base case: 

δ(qrun , ϵ, C (1 , s, d, a )) = ( qrun , ϵ ).

Move execution: 

δ(qrun , ϵ, M (k, s, d )) = ( qrun , ϵ ).

28 Preprint 

Termination: 

δ(qrun , ϵ, Z 0) = ( qacc , Z 0).

Thus, recursive calls are replaced by three unfinished instructions, whereas base-case calls and ex-plicit move instructions are popped from the stack. The planner accepts when all instructions have been processed and only the bottom-of-stack marker remains. Because the planner also emits actions, its complete formulation is more precisely a deterministic pushdown transducer (Aho & Ullman, 1969). Let 

ΩN = {Move( k, s, d ) | 1 ≤ k ≤ N, s, d ∈ P, s ̸ = d}

be the output alphabet. The output function satisfies 

λ(qrun , ϵ, C (1 , s, d, a )) = Move(1 , s, d ),λ(qrun , ϵ, M (k, s, d )) = Move( k, s, d ),

and produces no output for recursive-call expansion. Below, we show the complete sequence of prompt–target pairs for the planning procedure with 

n = 3 disks. The pop operation is omitted for clarity. Each time a prompt is presented to the LM, it is implicitly assumed that the corresponding instruction has been popped from the top of the stack. The output transduction performed by the λ function is indicated by the OUTPUT token preceding each action. 

Example: Full Push–Pop Prompt–Target Trace for Tower of Hanoi with n = 3                                                                       

> Step 1 Prompt
> INSTR CALL n=3 src=1 dst=3 aux=2
> Target
> PUSH CALL n=2 src=2 dst=3 aux=1 PUSH MOVE d=3 src=1 dst=3 PUSH CALL n=2 src=1 dst=2 aux=3
> Step 2 Prompt
> INSTR CALL n=2 src=1 dst=2 aux=3
> Target
> PUSH CALL n=1 src=3 dst=2 aux=1 PUSH MOVE d=2 src=1 dst=2 PUSH CALL n=1 src=1 dst=3 aux=2
> Step 3 Prompt
> INSTR CALL n=1 src=1 dst=3 aux=2
> Target
> OUTPUT Move disk 1 from 1to 3
> Step 4 Prompt
> INSTR MOVE d=2 src=1 dst=2
> Target
> OUTPUT Move disk 2 from 1to 2
> Step 5 Prompt
> INSTR CALL n=1 src=3 dst=2 aux=1
> Target
> OUTPUT Move disk 1 from 3to 2
> Step 6 Prompt

29 Preprint                                                              

> INSTR MOVE d=3 src=1 dst=3
> Target
> OUTPUT Move disk 3 from 1to 3
> Step 7 Prompt
> INSTR CALL n=2 src=2 dst=3 aux=1
> Target
> PUSH CALL n=1 src=1 dst=3 aux=2 PUSH MOVE d=2 src=2 dst=3 PUSH CALL n=1 src=2 dst=1 aux=3
> Step 8 Prompt
> INSTR CALL n=1 src=2 dst=1 aux=3
> Target
> OUTPUT Move disk 1 from 2to 1
> Step 9 Prompt
> INSTR MOVE d=2 src=2 dst=3
> Target
> OUTPUT Move disk 2 from 2to 3
> Step 10 Prompt
> INSTR CALL n=1 src=1 dst=3 aux=2
> Target
> OUTPUT Move disk 1 from 1to 3

## H EXTENDED TRAINING SCALING RESULTS 

In this section, we provide the complete results of the experiment designed to investigate how learn-ing scales with the number of complete training instances used during training. The results for BlocksWorld and Extended BlocksWorld are presented in Table 4, while the results for the Pancake Puzzle are presented in Table 6. The overall findings are consistent with those reported in the main text; however, these detailed results provide a more fine-grained view of how performance changes as the number of training instances is reduced, particularly for larger values of n.For TOH, we report the values of n for which each hold-out setting fails, together with the corre-sponding failure step whenever an execution error occurs. The results are shown in Table 5. In one failure case at n = 15 with a 15% hold-out setting, the entire plan was executed without any explicit execution error; however, the final state was incorrect, with only 12 disks moved to the third peg while the three largest disks remained on the first peg. For this case, the failure step is reported as “–” since no execution error occurred during the planning process. 

## I CONTEXT WINDOW GROWTH DURING PLANNING 

In this section, we examine how the context window evolves throughout the planning process across all environments. In this experiment, the context window is defined as the initial prompt together with all targets generated by the language model and written to the tape throughout planning. Since the highest complexity level in each environment exhibits the longest planning trajectory and sub-sumes all planning patterns observed at lower complexity levels, we report results only for the largest value of n in each domain. Figure 7 presents the results for all four environments, showing both the context window size and the prompt size at each planning step. As shown in the figure, the size of the prompt passed to the language model remains nearly constant throughout planning for TOH and the Pancake Puzzle, while the total context window grows linearly with the solution length. In 30 Preprint Table 4: Success rates (%) for BlocksWorld and Extended BlocksWorld across all complexity levels (n blocks) and numbers of complete training instances. 

(a) BlocksWorld 

n Training Instances 500 400 300 200 100 50 30 10 56 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 94 7 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 8 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 92 9 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 84 10 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 80 11 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 82 12 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 80 13 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 84 14 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 92 15 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 16 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 92 17 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 90 18 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 19 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 92 20 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 76 21 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 96 82 22 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 92 82 23 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 96 74 24 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 72 25 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 78 26 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 94 58 27 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 96 64 28 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 90 64 29 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 94 52 30 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 92 54 31 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 92 36 32 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 92 34 33 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 92 40 34 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 88 30 35 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 90 30 36 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 88 30 37 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 94 20 38 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 86 10 39 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 0 640 100 100 100 100 100 98 92 2 0

(b) Extended BlocksWorld 

n Training Instances 500 400 300 200 100 50 30 10 56 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 96 94 7 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 96 8 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 86 88 9 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 94 10 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 88 11 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 94 86 12 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 88 82 13 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 90 86 14 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 92 82 15 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 82 78 16 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 78 80 17 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 80 68 18 100 100 98 100 98 100 96 82 60 19 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 80 62 20 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 76 72 21 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 66 66 22 100 100 100 100 100 100 96 82 66 23 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 78 64 24 100 100 100 98 98 100 98 74 70 25 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 66 52 26 100 100 98 100 100 100 100 74 46 27 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 88 48 28 100 98 100 100 100 96 98 60 36 29 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 60 36 30 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 60 38 31 100 100 100 100 100 100 94 62 26 32 100 100 100 100 100 96 94 66 22 33 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 64 30 34 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 68 26 35 98 100 100 100 98 100 100 66 16 36 98 100 100 100 98 96 100 54 16 37 100 98 100 100 100 98 100 48 12 38 100 100 98 98 98 98 96 58 239 100 96 100 100 98 98 92 52 640 100 96 98 100 98 94 94 40 2

Table 5: Tower of Hanoi success results across holdout percentages. A value of 1 indicates success. A value of 0 indicates failure, with the failure step shown in parentheses. Holdout percentage 

n disks 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 12 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 13 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 14 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 (8) 0 (8) 5 1 1 1 0 (7) 1 1 1 1 1 0 (7) 6 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 17 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 (25) 8 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 (194) 0 (26) 9 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 (509) 0 (27) 10 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 (197) 0 (1152) 11 1 0 (387) 1 1 1 0 (1537) 1 1 0 (386) 112 1 0 (1827) 1 1 0 (6146) 0 (1538) 1 0 (1828) 0 (509) 0 (1827) 13 1 1 1 1 1 0 (1539) 1 0 (1830) 0 (6144) 0 (1537) 14 1 1 0 (1830) 1 0 (24576) 0 (1158) 0 (12288) 0 (1830) 0 (197) 0 (1537) 15 1 0 (37855) 0 (–) 0 (6145) 0 (29984) 0 (1158) 0 (12288) 0 (1830) 0 (509) 0 (1827) Success rate 100.0% 80.0% 86.7% 86.7% 80.0% 66.7% 86.7% 73.3% 40.0% 33.3% both versions of BlocksWorld, the prompt size initially decreases as the start configuration is pro-gressively unstacked. (Single blocks on the table are not explicitly represented, but are implicitly found on the table.) The minimum prompt size is reached when all blocks are placed on the table. Thereafter, the prompt size increases as the blocks are stacked to match the goal configuration. These results highlight the effectiveness of the pointer mechanism for planning. First, it helps main-tain prediction accuracy throughout the planning process. Once the model has learned to execute a 31 Preprint Table 6: Success rates (%) for Pancake across all complexity levels ( n pancakes) and numbers of complete training instances.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

> nTraining Instances 500 400 300 200 100 50 30 10 56100 100 100 100 100 100 98 88 78 7100 100 100 100 100 100 94 88 66 8100 100 100 100 100 100 96 94 48 9100 100 100 100 100 100 98 88 810 100 100 100 100 100 100 96 88 66 11 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 84 40 12 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 76 22 13 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 68 48 14 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 76 60 15 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 70 74 16 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 72 84 17 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 82 44 18 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 76 84 19 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 76 86 20 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 52 54 21 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 58 92 22 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 86 90 23 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 76 46 24 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 76 44 25 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 56 64 26 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 74 56 27 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 52 76 28 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 68 54 29 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 58 44 30 100 100 100 100 100 100 98 70 48 31 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 70 32 32 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 66 46 33 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 20 54 34 100 100 100 100 98 100 98 62 20 35 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 58 20 36 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 62 637 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 58 10 38 100 100 100 100 100 94 100 36 039 100 100 100 100 96 100 96 30 240 100 100 100 100 100 98 82 18 0

particular instruction, its accuracy is largely independent of the total solution length because it only needs to attend to the current instruction and the relevant local information. In contrast, if the entire accumulated context were provided as input at every step, the model would need to retrieve the rel-evant information from an increasingly large context window, making the task progressively more difficult and potentially reducing accuracy. Second, the pointer mechanism substantially reduces computational cost. In our approach, the amount of information processed by the language model at each planning step remains approximately constant. In contrast, when the entire accumulated context is repeatedly passed to the model, the computational cost increases with the context length, since all tokens in the context participate in the attention computation. As a result, the overall com-putational cost grows with the length of the planning trajectory, whereas in our approach the cost per planning step remains nearly constant. 32 Preprint 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 

> 0
> 1,000
> 2,000
> 3,000
> 4,000
> 5,000

BlocksWorld         

> 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
> 0
> 1,000
> 2,000
> 3,000
> 4,000
> 5,000

Extended BlocksWorld        

> 0510 15 20 25 30 35
> 0
> 1,000
> 2,000
> 3,000
> 4,000
> 5,000
> 6,000
> 7,000

Pancake      

> 010,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000
> 0
> 100,000
> 200,000
> 300,000
> 400,000
> 500,000
> 600,000
> 700,000

TOH 

> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8

Planning step 

> Accumulated Context window size
> Prompt size at step

Accumulated Context window Prompt size 

Figure 7: Prompt size and cumulative context-window size over planning steps for BlocksWorld, Extended BlocksWorld, Pancake, and Tower of Hanoi (TOH). The x-axis shows the planning step. The context-window curve measures the initial prompt plus all model-generated text up to that step, while the prompt-size curve measures the prompt at the current step. 33