Title: ROFT-VINS: Robust Feature Tracking-based Visual-Inertial State Estimation for Harsh Environment

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.18746v1

Published Time: Fri, 20 Mar 2026 01:09:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# ROFT-VINS: Robust Feature Tracking-based Visual-Inertial State Estimation for Harsh Environment 

Sanghyun Park 1 and Soohee Han 2∗

> 1

Department of Convergence IT Engineering, POSTECH, Pohang, 37673, Korea (pash0302@postech.ac.kr) 

> 2

Department of Electrical Engineering and of Convergence IT Engineering, POSTECH, Pohang, 37673, Korea (sooheehan@postech.ac.kr) ∗ Corresponding author 

Abstract: SLAM (Simultaneous Localization and Mapping) and Odometry are important systems for estimating the position of mobile devices, such as robots and cars, utilizing one or more sensors. Particularly in camera-based SLAM or Odometry, effectively tracking visual features is important as it significantly impacts system performance. In this paper, we propose a method that leverages deep learning to robustly track visual features in monocular camera images. This method operates reliably even in textureless environments and situations with rapid lighting changes. Additionally, we evaluate the performance of our proposed method by integrating it into VINS-Fusion (Monocular-Inertial), a commonly used Visual-Inertial Odometry (VIO) system. 

Keywords: Visual-Inertial Odometry, Deep SLAM 

1. INTRODUCTION 

SLAM and odometry are important systems that en-able autonomous navigation [1] in mobile robots and self-driving vehicles. These rely on accurate estimation of the device’s position and orientation using various sen-sor inputs such as cameras, LiDAR, and Inertial Measure-ment Units (IMU). Among these, Visual-Inertial Odome-try (VIO) integrates information from cameras and IMU, making it robust against challenges such as textureless environments and motion blur. In the case of monocular systems, VIO also allows for the estimation of scale in-formation [2]. In visual-based odometry, the ability to reliably track features across consecutive frames is important. Tradi-tional methods often rely on feature descriptors such as SIFT [3], SURF [4], and ORB [5], which have shown ro-bustness in general environments. However, these meth-ods can encounter challenges in environments with tex-tureless or rapidly changing lighting conditions. These drive the investigation of sophisticated methods to en-hance the reliability and precision of feature tracking. Deep learning has provided powerful tools and driven innovation in many areas of computer vision, such as ob-ject detection, segmentation, and optical flow estimation. Optical flow, the pattern of apparent motion of objects in a visual scene, is particularly relevant for visual SLAM and odometry. Recent advancements in deep learning-based optical flow estimation, such as the RAFT (Recur-rent All-Pairs Field Transforms) network [6], have shown remarkable performance improvements over traditional methods. RAFT’s iterative refinement process [6] and all-pairs field transforms enable highly accurate and dense optical flow estimation, performing well even in chal-lenging scenarios. VINS-Mono [7] is a widely used VIO system in both academia and industry due to its robust and accurate per-formance. VINS-Mono [7] leverages visual and inertial measurements to provide pose estimation. However, like many VIO systems, its performance heavily depends on the quality of visual feature tracking. Therefore, improv-ing the feature tracker in VINS-Mono [7] can enhance the overall system performance. The VINS-Fusion system experimented on in this pa-per is an extended version of VINS-Mono [7]. VINS-Fusion not only expands the original VINS-Mono [7], which was limited to monocular inertial systems, to stereo inertial systems but also implements a multi-threading. Since the monocular inertial system in VINS-Fusion is nearly identical to that of VINS-Mono [7], VINS-Fusion as mentioned in this paper refers to the VINS-Mono [7] system. In this paper, we propose integrating the RAFT [6]-based optical flow method into the feature tracker of VINS-Mono [7]. By leveraging RAFT’s [6] superior op-tical flow estimation capabilities, our goal is to enhance the robustness and accuracy of VINS-Mono [7] in envi-ronments with sparse textures or dynamic lighting condi-tions. Additionally, through outlier rejection, we provide a more accurate feature tracker performance. The structure of this paper is as follows. In section 2, we review related work on VIO and deep learning-based optical flow. In Section 3, we detail the method of in-tegrating RAFT [6] into the feature tracking pipeline of VINS-Mono [7]. In section 4, we present our experimen-tal setup and results, demonstrating the performance im-provements achieved by the proposed approach. Finally, we make a conclusion in Section 5. By utilizing deep learning-based visual feature track-ing, this paper contributes to the fields of autonomous driving and robotics, providing a foundation for more ro-bust and reliable VIO systems. These contributions en-able autonomous vehicles and robots to operate more sta-bly in diverse environments, ultimately playing a crucial role in developing safer and more efficient autonomous driving solutions. 

> arXiv:2603.18746v1 [cs.RO] 19 Mar 2026

2. RELATED WORK 

In this section, We review the VIO and deep learning-based optical flow. 

2.1 Visual-Inertial Odometry 

SLAM and odometry are both methods used in robotics to estimate the position of mobile devices. However, they differ in their purpose and methodology. Odometry is tracking the position of a robot or vehicle as it moves, primarily using encoders, IMUs, and other sensors. This method estimates the current position by accumulating the traveled distance from an initial posi-tion. However, odometry can become less accurate over time due to accumulated drift. In contrast, SLAM allows a robot to simultaneously estimate its position and map an unknown environment. SLAM updates both the po-sition and the map by fusing various sensor data such as cameras, LiDAR, and IMU. During this process, the robot recognizes landmarks in the environment and recalculates its position based on them, thereby reducing errors. VIO is a method that fuses data from cameras and IMU to estimate the position and orientation of a device. VIO has an important function in various applications like robotics, autonomous driving, and AR(Augmented Reality) [8]. VINS-Mono [7] is versatile and robust monocular inertial SLAM system. It includes loop closing with DBoW2 [9] and 4 DoF pose-graph optimization. Also, it has feature tracker using Lucas-Kanade [10] method based optical flow. ORB-SLAM3 [2] is one of the latest versions of visual-inertial SLAM systems, performing real-time lo-calization and mapping in 3D environments. It supports monocular, stereo, and RGB-D cameras, and has real-time operation, robust localization, loop closing, and re-localization capabilities. It can adapt to environmental changes over time and efficiently operate in large or com-plex environments through its multi-map system. Utiliz-ing the ORB [5] feature extractor and keyframe-based tracking, it estimates the relative motion of the cam-era with visual-inertial odometry. ORB-SLAM3 [2] is a visual-inertial SLAM system that operates stably and accurately in various environments, providing real-time performance. 

2.2 Deep Learning based Optical Flow 

Optical flow estimates pixel motion between consec-utive image frames to understand the pattern of apparent motion. Traditional optical flow algorithms are primarily based on mathematical models, but advancements in deep learning have led to the emergence of more powerful and accurate methods. RAFT [6] is a deep learning model for optical flow es-timation that accurately tracks the movement of objects in image sequences. RAFT [6] estimates motion vectors by iteratively computing correlations between all pairs of pixels, providing high-precision optical flow estimation and efficient computation. This enables optimal optical flow estimation through end-to-end learning and demon-strates excellent performance across various datasets. Its main components include a grid feature extractor for ex-tracting image features, a cost volume generation for cal-culating pixel pair correlations between images, and a re-current update module that iteratively updates the optical flow using a recurrent network. RAFT [6] can be utilized in various fields such as computer vision, autonomous driving, and augmented reality, excelling particularly in applications like video analysis, object tracking, and mo-tion compensation. Tracking Everything Everywhere All at Once [11], called OmniMotion, is an advanced video tracking method designed to estimate dense, long-range motion across entire video sequences. OmniMotion [11] ad-dresses the limitations of traditional optical flow and par-ticle video tracking algorithms, which often struggle with occlusions and maintaining global consistency over ex-tended sequences. By using a quasi-3D canonical volume representation, OmniMotion [11] ensures globally con-sistent tracking of every pixel throughout a video, even when objects are occluded. This is achieved through bi-jective mappings between local frames and the canoni-cal volume, allowing accurate tracking of motion without needing explicit 3D reconstruction of the scene. The sys-tem is built on a neural network architecture that includes six affine coupling layers and uses a coordinate-based network for mapping 3D coordinates to density and color. This enables the algorithm to retain information about the relative depth of scene points, which helps in maintaining accurate tracking through occlusions. 

3. METHOD 

Fig. 1. The architecture of our odometry system. 

Fig. 2. The pipeline of our outlier rejection module. Our proposed method is shown in Fig. 1. We use the odometry estimation part of VINS-Mono [7]. In this setup, we have integrated RAFT [6] into the feature tracker system. Additionally, in the outlier rejection part, features that exhibit different movements from their sur-rounding features are identified as outliers and subse-quently removed. 3.1 Robust Feature Tracker 

In VINS-Mono [7], the KLT sparse optical flow algo-rithm [10] based on the Lucas-Kanade method is used for optical flow. Additionally, new features are detected [12] to maintain a sufficient number of features in each im-age [7]. Furthermore, when detecting features, they are selected to ensure a minimum distance between them [7]. Our approach uses RAFT [6] instead of [10] for optical flow estimation. This method is robust against aggressive motion as well as unstable image changes caused by sud-den variations in lighting. However, because RAFT [6] provides results for the all pixel rather than specific pix-els, post-processing is required. First, we identify the pix-els corresponding to the features, then extract the motion information for these pixels from the RAFT [6] inference results. The robust feature tracker process is presented in Al-gorithm 1. By applying the RAFT [6] inference image to the previous frame’s features ft−1, we obtain the tracked features ft in the current frame. Outliers that fall outside the image boundaries are removed, and new features are extracted using [12] to maintain the number of features, equivalent to the number of removed features. During this process, a mask is generated for the existing features to ensure that the distance between features is above a cer-tain threshold. Finally, for use in the state estimator, we accumulate the results of ft, the undistorted results of ft,and the velocity between ft and ft−1.The outlier rejection pipeline is shown in Fig. 2. First, 2D KD tree is constructed using the tracked features. Then, for each feature, the KD tree is used to search for the nearest n features within a certain distance. If a fea-ture exhibits a different movement compared to its sur-rounding features, based on the tracked information, it is identified as an outlier and removed. 

3.2 State Estimator 

In the State Estimator part, we use the sliding window-based optimization of VINS-Mono [7]. We cal-culate the IMU measurement residual rB through IMU-preintegration and the visual measurement residual rC

using the robust feature tracker within a sliding window, then compute the state X that minimizes these residuals [7]. 

4. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULT 

4.1 Experiment environment 

The experiments are performed using the EuRoC MAV dataset [13] and the UMA Visual-Inertial dataset [14]. The EuRoC MAV dataset [13] includes various flight sequences collected in indoor environments and provides Ground Truth data. It is frequently used to evaluate the accuracy and robustness of VIO systems. Among these, we evaluate the hard sequences for each sequence type. The UMA Visual-Inertial dataset [14] includes various sequences collected in both indoor and outdoor environ-

Algorithm 1 Robust Feature Tracker  

> 1:

Input: Image from current frame It 

> 2:

procedure TRACK FEATURE (It) 

> 3:

Image from previous frame It−1 

> 4:

Tracked feature from previous frame ft−1 

> 5:

ft ← GetTrackResult( It−1, I t, f t−1) 

> 6:

ft ← OutlierRejection( ft) 

> 7:

Add feature for reduced feature num:  

> 8:

ft ← ft+ GoodFeatureToTrack( It) 

> 9:

Get feature information Ft for state estimation:  

> 10:

Ft ← GetFeatureInfo( ft, f t−1, I t, I t−1) 

> 11:

It−1 ← It 

> 12:

ft−1 ← ft 

> 13:

return Ft 

> 14:

end procedure  

> 15:

function GetTrackResult( It−1, I t, f t−1) 

> 16:

Get RAFT result image R: 

> 17:

R ← RAFT (It−1, I t, f t−1) 

> 18:

Calculate tracked feature ft: 

> 19:

ft ← R(ft−1) 

> 20:

return ft 

> 21:

end function  

> 22:

function GetFeatureInfo( ft, f t−1, I t, I t−1) 

> 23:

Ft ← ft 

> 24:

Ft ← Ft+ undistort( ft) 

> 25:

Calculate feature velocity( un means undistort):  

> 26:

Ft ← Ft + It(un (ft)) −It−1(un (ft−1))  

> dt
> 27:

return Ft 

> 28:

end function 

ments, allowing for performance evaluation under differ-ent lighting conditions and in textureless environments. It is useful for comprehensively evaluating the perfor-mance of VIO systems under diverse conditions. Since it does not provide Ground Truth, we conducted a quali-tative evaluation. Using both datasets, we compare and evaluate the per-formance of our method and VINS-Fusion(monocular-inertial odometry) [7] using evo [15]. 

4.2 Experiment-1: Quantitative Evaluation of Gen-eral Environments 

We evaluate three sequences from the EuRoC MAV dataset [13]. Among these three sequences, V103 and V203 include aggressive motion and textureless environ-ments.  

> •

MH 05 difficult(MH05)  

> •

V1 03 difficult(V103)  

> •

V2 03 difficult(V203) We compare the Ground Truth data with the Relative Pose Error (RPE) for evaluation. The experimental results are shown in Table 1. The performance across all three sequences is similar, indicating that our method achieves performance comparable to the existing system in general environments. Fig. 3 to Fig. 6 visualize the trajectory and RPE for each sequence. Table 1. Mean of RPE [m] in the EuRoC MAV datasets MH05 V103 V203 VINS-Fusion 0.0045 0.0060 0.0088 Ours 0.0055 0.0049 0.0060 

Fig. 3. Trajectory in MH05. Green line is result of ours, purple line is result of VINS-Fusion. 

Fig. 4. Trajectory in V103. Green line is result of ours, purple line is result of VINS-Fusion. 

4.3 Experiment-2: Qualitative Evaluation of Chal-lenging Environment 

We compared three sequences from the UMA Visual-Inertial dataset [14]. Each sequence has challenging envi-ronments, including dark settings, textureless areas, and 

Fig. 5. Trajectory in V203. Green line is result of ours, purple line is result of VINS-Fusion. 

Fig. 6. RPE results: (Left) RPE in MH05. (Center) RPE in V103. (Right) RPE in V203. Green box is the result of ours, purple box is the result of VINS-Fusion. 

Fig. 7. Trajectory in UMA parking csc2. Green line is result of ours, purple line is result of VINS-Fusion. dynamic illumination. All three sequences has same start-ing and ending points. Fig. 7 shows the experimental results for UMA-parking csc2. Unlike our method, VINS-Fusion exhibits significant drift and noisy trajectory results. Additionally, Fig. 8. Trajectory in UMA parking eng1. Green line is result of ours, purple line is result of VINS-Fusion. 

Fig. 9. Trajectory in UMA fantasy csc1. Green line is result of ours, purple line is result of VINS-Fusion. 

Fig. 10. Ours feature tracking image in challenging en-vironment. As the feature points change from blue to red, it indicates that they have been tracked in more frames. our method demonstrates a trajectory closer to the origin, indicating better performance. For UMA parking eng1 (see Fig. 8), the sequence is affected by strong light, lead-ing to unstable image sequences. VINS-Fusion shows divergence in the middle of the trajectory, whereas our method maintains a non-divergent trajectory. Lastly, for UMA fantasy csc1 (see Fig. 9), VINS-Fusion’s trajec-tory contains a lot of noise, while our method remains more stable and closer to the origin. As observed in the experiments, unstable and noisy trajectories are caused by the impact of incorrect feature tracking. Fig. 10 and Fig. 11 demonstrate that our feature tracking operates robustly in challenging environments. 

5. CONCLUSION 

In this paper, we evaluated the odometry performance of our method and VINS-Mono [7] using the EuRoC 

Fig. 11. VINS-Mono feature tracking image in challeng-ing environment. As the feature points change from blue to red, it indicates that they have been tracked in more frames. MAV dataset [13] and the UMA Visual-Inertial dataset [14]. The experiments were conducted on challenging datasets to verify the robustness of the feature tracker, especially in environments with textureless and dynamic illumination. Our robust feature tracker demonstrated high feature tracking performance in textureless environments and sit-uations with rapid changes in lighting. Additionally, it en-abled stable odometry estimation with fewer outliers. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that our method can significantly enhance the performance of the VINS-Mono [7] system in challenging environment. By provid-ing a more robust feature tracker, particularly in challeng-ing situations such as environments with poor textures or rapid changes in lighting, this method shows great poten-tial for applications in autonomous vehicles and robotics. Future research will focus on further optimizing com-putational costs and exploring the applicability of this method in various real-time applications. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

This research outputs are the part of the project “Disaster Field Investigation using Mobile Robot tech-nology ( Ⅱ)”, which is supported by the NDMI (Na-tional Disaster Management research Institute) under the project number NDMI-2024-06-02. 

REFERENCES 

[1] Haeyeon Gim, Minwook Jeong, and Soohee Han. Autonomous navigation system with obstacle avoidance using 2.5d map generated by point cloud. In 2021 21st International Conference on Control, Automation and Systems (ICCAS) , pages 749–752, 2021. [2] Carlos Campos, Richard Elvira, Juan J. Gomez, Jos´ e M. M. Montiel, and Juan D. Tard´ os. ORB-SLAM3: An accurate open-source library for vi-sual, visual-inertial and multi-map SLAM. IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 37(6):1874–1890, 2021. [3] David G. Lowe. Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints. International Journal of Computer Vision , 60:91–110, 2004. [4] Herbert Bay, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Luc Van Gool. SURF: Speeded up robust features. volume 3951, pages 404–417, 07 2006. [5] Ethan Rublee, Vincent Rabaud, Kurt Konolige, and Gary Bradski. Orb: An efficient alternative to sift or surf. In 2011 International Conference on Com-puter Vision , pages 2564–2571, 2011. [6] Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. Raft: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for optical flow. In Proc. Eu-ropean Conf. on Computer Vision (ECCV) , pages 402–419, Germany, 2020. [7] Tong Qin, Peiliang Li, and Shaojie Shen. Vins-mono: A robust and versatile monocular visual-inertial state estimator. IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 34(4):1004–1020, 2018. [8] Deqing Sun, Xiaodong Yang, Ming-Yu Liu, and Jan Kautz. Pwc-net: Cnns for optical flow using pyra-mid, warping, and cost volume. In 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition , pages 8934–8943, 2018. [9] Dorian Galvez-L´ opez and Juan D. Tardos. Bags of binary words for fast place recognition in im-age sequences. IEEE Transactions on Robotics ,28(5):1188–1197, 2012. [10] Bruce D. Lucas and Takeo Kanade. An iterative image registration technique with an application to stereo vision. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 1981. [11] Qianqian Wang, Yen-Yu Chang, Ruojin Cai, Zhengqi Li, Bharath Hariharan, Aleksander Holyn-ski, and Noah Snavely. Tracking everything every-where all at once. ICCV , 2023. [12] Jianbo Shi and Tomasi. Good features to track. In 1994 Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 593– 600, 1994. [13] Michael Burri, Janosch Nikolic, Pascal Gohl, Thomas Schneider, Joern Rehder, Sammy Omari, Markus W Achtelik, and Roland Siegwart. The eu-roc micro aerial vehicle datasets. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 2016. [14] David Zu˜ niga-No¨ el, Alberto Jaenal, Ruben Gomez-Ojeda, and Javier Gonzalez-Jimenez. The uma-vi dataset: Visual–inertial odometry in low-textured and dynamic illumination environments. The Inter-national Journal of Robotics Research , 39(9):1052– 1060, 2020. [15] Michael Grupp. evo: Python package for the evalu-ation of odometry and slam. https://github. com/MichaelGrupp/evo , 2017.