Title: A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network Integrating Complementary Estimation Mechanisms for Stable Visual Object TrackingA

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.22604v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 02:21:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 50

Markdown Content:
# A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network Integrating Complementary Estimation Mechanisms for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

## Yancheng Zhou a,c , Hanle Zheng a, Lei Deng a and Yujie Wu a,b ,∗

> a

Center for Brain Inspired Computing Research (CBICR), Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 

> b

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China 

> c

Weixian College, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 

A R T I C L E I N F O 

Keywords :Hybrid neural networks Brain-inspired computing Continuous attractor dynamics Neuromorphic computing Visual object tracking 

A B S T R A C T 

Hybrid neural networks (HNNs) that integrate artificial neural networks (ANNs) with brain-inspired neural networks have achieved broad success across perception and control tasks. However, much of the current success is confined to neuron-scale hybridization, where discrete, spike-based coding fundamentally limits applicability to continuous-state estimation tasks. In neuroscience, continuous attractor neural networks (CANNs) represent continuous states through neural ensembles, pointing to a population-scale route for HNNs to address this limitation. Yet, principled methodologies for ANN–CANN integration remain largely underexplored. In this work, we propose a theory-grounded ANN-CANN hybridization framework and instantiate it as a hybrid tracking neural network (HTNN) for visual object tracking, a representative continuous-state estimation task. The framework aligns ANN response maps with CANN dynamics in the same state space, enabling the two heterogeneous branches to interact through the shared state representation. Furthermore, we uncover a functional bias-variance complementarity: data-driven ANNs provide asymptotically unbiased estimates, while CANN estimates are low-variance but temporally lagged. By operationalizing this complementarity, HTNN achieves stable and accurate tracking across nine visual tracking benchmarks, consistently outperforming single-network baselines and existing hybrid models. Notably, these performance gains are robustly maintained even under diverse environmental variations, including occlusion, motion blur, and background interference. Through this proof-of-concept study, our framework offers a generalizable foundation for advancing HNNs toward population-scale hybridization. 

## 1. Introduction 

The integration of computer-science-oriented and neuroscience-oriented computational models has long been a pivotal direction in the development of intelligent systems (Zador et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024). Hybrid Neural Networks (HNNs) instantiate this direction by integrating Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) with brain-inspired computational models within unified architectures (Pei et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2024). Current HNN research has mainly followed a neuron-scale hybridization route, typically integrating ANNs with network architectures based on neuronal spiking dynamics, such as spiking neural networks (SNNs) (Zhao et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2024). Through the exploitation of their complementary advantages in accuracy, robustness, and energy efficiency, this route has achieved broad success across perception, control, and neuromorphic sensing tasks (Woźniak et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2025; Liu and Zhao, 2022; Lin et al., 2022; Ahmed et al., 2025). However, this paradigm struggles with tasks requiring continuous-state estimation, because continuously evolving variables are difficult to maintain through its discrete spiking mechanisms, as shown in Figure 1(A) (He et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2022). Continuous attractor neural networks (CANNs) model an important neural mechanism for continuous-state representation in neuroscience. Through attractor dynamics shaped by local excitation and global inhibition, CANNs form a continuous family of bump states whose centers can move smoothly within the represented state space (Fung et al., 2010). CANNs have been widely used to model continuous variables and cognitive states (Khona and Fiete, 2022), including head direction (Angelaki and Laurens, 2020; Kim et al., 2017), spatial location (Gardner et al., 2022; Burak and Fiete, 2009), and working memory (Wojtak et al., 2023; Wimmer et al., 2014). Computational studies 

> ∗

Corresponding author 

wu-yj16@tsinghua.org.cn (Y. Wu) 

> ORCID

(s): 0009-0008-7537-3238 (Y. Zhou); 0009-0002-9622-780X (H. Zheng); 0000-0002-5172-9411 (L. Deng); 

0000-0002-8950-6803 (Y. Wu) 

Preprint Page 1 of 50 

> arXiv:2606.22604v1 [cs.NE] 21 Jun 2026 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking

of CANNs further show that time-varying external inputs can drive activity bumps to track continuously evolving targets (Fung et al., 2009; Yu et al., 2019). Building on this property, CANNs have also been applied to visual object tracking (VOT), a representative continuous-state estimation task, and demonstrated that population-bump dynamics can support smooth visual target tracking (Deng et al., 2018). Together, this evidence motivates a population-scale hybridization route: integrating CANNs with ANNs to enable both data-driven, accurate estimation and dynamical maintenance of continuous states, as illustrated in Figure 1(B). Despite this promise, a critical bottleneck remains: effectively bridging these two heterogeneous models to exploit their complementary strengths. While recent heuristic attempts have incorporated CANNs into HNN designs (Chancan et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2023), their simplistic serial or parallel designs overlook the structural heterogeneity between CANNs and other neural modules. Equally important, none of them provided the theoretical analysis to ground the hybridization mechanism. Be Suitable for 

> Be Suitable for

## ANNs  SNNs  

> Discrete Spik e
> Continuous Value

## ANNs  CANNs 

… …

> State -space
> Alignment

## Neuron -scale Hybridization 

## Population -scale Hybridization 

(A) 

(B) 

## Discrete 

## Classification 

## Continuous 

## Estimation 

# …

0 1 2 3

Event Data 

Video  

> Figure 1: Motivation for population-scale hybridization in HNNs. (A) Neuron-scale hybridization integrates ANNs with architectures based on neuronal spiking dynamics, such as SNNs. This route is suited to spatiotemporal tasks with discrete, event-driven data flow. (B) Population-scale hybridization aligns ANNs with neural population dynamics for continuous-state representation, such as CANNs, in the state space. This route is suited to maintaining and estimating states that evolve continuously in space and time, such as tracking moving visual targets.

Here, we present a theory-grounded framework that constructs hybrid tracking neural networks (HTNNs) by synergistically hybridizing an ANN and a CANN for VOT. The framework aligns ANN- and CANN-based representations, characterizes their complementary estimation benefits, and realizes these benefits through the two-stage fusion design of the HTNN. The ANN branch is instantiated as a classical and compact fully-convolutional Siamese Neural Network (SiamFC) (Bertinetto et al., 2016). This choice preserves the ANN branch’s target-localization capability while keeping the experimental focus on the fusion mechanism itself. Systematic experiments show that HTNN stably and accurately tracks targets, outperforming single-network baselines, existing HNN baselines, and an ANN–CANN Direct Fusion baseline across multiple metrics. These advantages remain consistent under challenging environmental variations, demonstrating the potential of HTNN for open-world object tracking applications. The main contributions of this work are threefold.  

> Preprint Page 2 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking

• We propose a novel population-scale hybrid framework that integrates an ANN and a CANN for continuous-state estimation, using the VOT as a representative testbed. By formulating the two modules as complementary estimators over a shared state space, the framework establishes a principled design that naturally connects representation alignment, functional role characterization, and synergistic fusion of two heterogeneous branches. 

• We mathematically characterize the complementary advantages of this hybrid framework from a bias–variance perspective. Specifically, we demonstrate that the data-driven ANN branch provides an asymptotically unbiased estimate of the current state, while the CANN branch provides a lower-variance estimate with finite temporal lag. Extending this to continuous-time dynamics reveals that the CANN branch supports stable tracking by continuous evolution and suppressing remote response peaks. Building upon this insight, we develop an HTNN model with a two-stage architecture: a representation-fusion stage that refines ANN response maps using motion cues, and an estimation-fusion stage that additively combines both branches for robust final state estimation. 

• We comprehensively evaluate HTNN on nine visual tracking benchmarks comprising over 1,500 video sequences and 1.57M frames. Across 18 challenging environmental variations, HTNN outperforms single-network and HNN baselines in accuracy and stability. Compared with the ANN–CANN Direct Fusion baseline, HTNN achieves overall average gains of 77.3% in Precision and 56.4% in Success Rate. Drift analyses indicate that HTNN obtains these empirical gains by exploiting the bias–variance complementarity between the two branches. Visualizations of response maps and trajectories further provide qualitative evidence that HTNN suppresses unstable response fluctuations and maintains coherent target-state evolution. 

## 2. Related Work 

2.1. Hybrid Neural Networks 

HNNs have emerged as a representative paradigm for integrating computer-science-oriented artificial neural networks with neuroscience-oriented brain-inspired models. Their central goal is to coordinate structurally and functionally heterogeneous modules within unified architectures, allowing different models to contribute complementary computational roles (Liu et al., 2024). Existing HNN research has mainly followed a neuron-scale hybridization route. In this paradigm, data-driven ANNs provide accurate continuous-valued feature representations. They are integrated with architectures based on neuronal spiking dynamics at the levels of information coding, neural dynamics, and network design, exploiting complementary advantages in accuracy, robustness, and energy efficiency (Zhao et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2024). This route has been developed across system architectures (Zhang et al., 2020), general design and learning frameworks (Zhao et al., 2022), biologically inspired neural modules (Woźniak et al., 2020; Strohmer et al., 2021), and neuromorphic hardware platforms (Pei et al., 2019). It has also supported applications in event-based optical flow (Sun et al., 2025), visual attention (Liu and Zhao, 2022), low-power visual perception (Aydin et al., 2024), action recognition (Xiao et al., 2025), and event-based object detection (Ahmed et al., 2025). Yet the discrete nature of this paradigm makes it less naturally matched to continuous-state estimation, where the represented state must evolve continuously over time (He et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2022). This limitation motivates population-scale hybridization as an important direction for extending HNNs. ANN–CANN hybridization provides a suitable starting point along this direction. Early studies such as FlyNet and NeuroGPR have integrated CANNs with ANNs or other network modules through serial or parallel architectures for visual or robotic place recognition (Chancan et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2023). However, these heuristic architectures overlook the structural heterogeneity between CANNs and other network modules, and they lack a theoretical analysis that grounds the hybridization mechanism. To address these issues, our work develops a theory-grounded ANN–CANN hybridization framework that aligns ANN and CANN representations in a shared state space, characterizes their complementary estimation roles, and realizes functional synergy through the two-stage fusion design of HTNN. 

2.2. Continuous Attractor Neural Networks 

CANNs provide a canonical neural population-dynamics mechanism for continuous-state representation (Wu et al., 2016; Khona and Fiete, 2022). Through recurrent local excitation and global inhibition, a CANN can stably maintain a localized activity bump whose center encodes a low-dimensional state (Fung et al., 2010). The classical form of this dynamical structure is detailed later in Section 3.1. This mechanism has been widely used to model continuous variables and cognitive states in neural systems, including head direction (Angelaki and Laurens, 2020; Kim et al.,  

> Preprint Page 3 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking

2017; Vafidis et al., 2022), spatial location (Gardner et al., 2022; Burak and Fiete, 2009; Chen et al., 2026), and working memory (Wojtak et al., 2023; Wimmer et al., 2014; Seeholzer et al., 2019). Beyond these representational accounts, computational studies of CANN tracking dynamics have shown that time-varying external inputs can drive activity bumps to track continuously evolving stimuli, with the resulting dynamics shaped by response delay and bump deformation (Fung et al., 2009; Yu et al., 2019). Under appropriate input conditions, such as weak stimulus strength and a small offset from the bump center, translational modes dominate CANN dynamics and drive the bump smoothly toward the target, whereas deformation-related modes decay exponentially over time (Fung et al., 2009). This tracking capability has motivated applications of CANNs to VOT as a representative continuous-state estimation task. For example, a two-dimensional CANN implemented on a many-core neural network chip can track visual targets rapidly and smoothly (Deng et al., 2018), and a Tianjic-based unmanned bicycle system further uses CANN dynamics for real-time following of a moving human in outdoor scenes (Pei et al., 2019). Despite these successful applications, how to integrate the advantages of CANNs with data-driven ANNs into a unified hybrid framework remains an open question and is still largely underexplored. 

2.3. Visual Object Tracking 

VOT is a representative continuous-state estimation task. Given an initial annotation in the first frame, a tracker must maintain the evolving target state from video, such as location, scale, or bounding box (Kadam et al., 2024). VOT methods have evolved from correlation-filter-based trackers (Bolme et al., 2010; Henriques et al., 2015) to deep Siamese trackers (Bertinetto et al., 2016; Li et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019) and Transformer-based trackers (Wei et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023). Among deep Siamese trackers, SiamFC established fully convolutional Siamese networks as a representative paradigm for generic object tracking (Bertinetto et al., 2016). Its simplicity and representative design make SiamFC a suitable carrier for evaluating our ANN–CANN hybridization framework: it preserves the discriminative target-state estimation capability of an ANN while reducing the influence of task-irrelevant architectural factors. Driven by applications in embodied perception (Dunnhofer et al., 2022), robotics (Ess et al., 2008), and autonomous systems (Mueller et al., 2016), VOT benchmarks have also expanded toward long-term sequences, open-world categories, and diverse environmental variations (Müller et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2021; Galoogahi et al., 2017). While existing VOT models have advanced discriminative visual estimation through stronger matching, representa-tion, or attention mechanisms, the explicit dynamical maintenance of continuously and stably evolving target states remains less systematically explored. Our ANN–CANN hybridization framework addresses this gap by aligning visual response maps with brain-inspired attractor-based state dynamics, providing a theory-grounded route toward accurate and temporally stable tracking under environmental variations. 

## 3. Preliminaries 

3.1. A Canonical 2D Model of CANN 

The defining dynamical properties of CANNs are translationally invariant recurrent interactions, local excitation, and global inhibition, which give rise to a continuous family of bump states and enable stable tracking of external stimuli. Here, we introduce the canonical 2D CANN model established in classical works (Fung et al., 2010, 2009): 

2D continuous dynamics. Let 𝒙 = ( 𝑥, 𝑦 ) ∈ ℝ2 denote a coordinate in the two-dimensional state space. Denote by 

𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) the synaptic input at time 𝑡 to neurons whose preferred state is 𝒙 , and by 𝑟 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) the firing rate of these neurons. The standard 2D-CANN dynamics can be written as 

𝜏 𝑐 

𝜕𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 )

𝜕𝑡 = − 𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) + 𝐼 ext (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) + 𝜌 n ∫ℝ2

𝐽 (𝒙 − 𝒙 ′) 𝑟 (𝒙 ′, 𝑡 ) d 𝒙 ′,𝑟 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) = 𝑈 2(𝒙 , 𝑡 )1 + 𝑘𝜌 n ∫ℝ2 𝑈 2(𝒙 ′, 𝑡 ) d 𝒙 ′ ,𝐽 (𝒙 − 𝒙 ′) = 𝐴 

2𝜋𝑎 2 exp 

(

− ‖𝒙 − 𝒙 ′‖2

2𝑎 2

)

,

(1) where 𝜏 𝑐 is the time constant, 𝐼 ext (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) is the external input, 𝜌 n is the neural density, 𝑘 controls the strength of divisive normalization, and 𝐽 (𝒙 − 𝒙 ′) is a translationally invariant Gaussian interaction kernel with amplitude 𝐴 and width 𝑎 .This 2D model admits a theoretically tractable analysis of bump dynamics and tracking behavior.  

> Preprint Page 4 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking

Stationary bump family. When the external input vanishes, i.e., 𝐼 ext (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) = 0 , the network admits a continuous family of stationary bump states indexed by any center 𝒛 ∈ ℝ2:

𝑈 (𝒙 ∣ 𝒛 ) = 𝑈 0 exp 

(

− ‖𝒙 − 𝒛 ‖2

4𝑎 2

)

,𝑟 (𝒙 ∣ 𝒛 ) = 𝑟 0 exp 

(

− ‖𝒙 − 𝒛 ‖2

2𝑎 2

)

,

(2) where 𝑈 0 and 𝑟 0 are constants determined by the network parameters (Fung et al., 2009). Because these stationary states exist for arbitrary 𝒛 , the network can continuously represent target locations in the 2D state space while preserving a stable Gaussian bump profile under moderate perturbations. External inputs can drive the bump to translate along the continuous family of stationary states, whereas non-translational modes that deform the bump shape decay over time. This property underlies the reduced center dynamics used later in our theoretical analysis (Fung et al., 2010, 2009). 

Discrete implementation on a toroidal grid. For practical computation, the 2D continuous network is discretized onto an 𝑁 × 𝑁 toroidal grid, yielding matrix-valued states 𝑼 (𝑡 ) and 𝒓 (𝑡 ). The discrete network dynamics are then given by 

𝜏 𝑐 

𝑼 (𝑡 + Δ 𝑡 ) − 𝑼 (𝑡 )Δ𝑡 = − 𝑼 (𝑡 ) + 𝑰 ext (𝑡 ) + 𝑱 ⊛ 𝒓 (𝑡 ),

𝒓 (𝑡 ) = 𝑼 (𝑡 ) ⊙ 𝑼 (𝑡 )1 + 𝑘 ‖𝑼 (𝑡 )‖2

> 𝐹

,

𝑱 (𝒑 , 𝒑 ′) = 𝐴 

2𝜋𝑎 2 exp 

(

− dis( 𝒑 , 𝒑 ′)2

2𝑎 2

)

,

(3) where Δ𝑡 is the discrete time step, ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication, ‖⋅‖𝐹 is the Frobenius norm, ⊛ denotes circular convolution, and dis( 𝒑 , 𝒑 ′) is the toroidal distance between grid locations. 

3.2. Fully-convolutional Siamese Neural Networks 

Algorithm 1 SiamFC-style online inference at frame 𝑘 

Require: Current frame 𝑽 (𝑘 ), template 𝑽 (0) temp , previous target center 𝒄 (𝑘 −1) , previous target size 𝒃 (𝑘 −1) , scale-index set 



Ensure: Updated target center 𝒄 (𝑘 ), updated target size 𝒃 (𝑘 ) 

> 1:

for each scale index 𝑠 ∈  do  

> 2:

Construct the scaled search image 𝑽 (𝑘 )search ,𝑠 according to Eq. (7)  

> 3:

Compute the response map 𝑺 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑠

according to Eq. (8)  

> 4:

Compute the penalized peak score 𝜋 𝑠 max (𝑖,𝑗 ) 𝑺 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑠

(𝑖, 𝑗 ) 

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

Select the scale index 𝑠 (𝑘 ) according to Eq. (9)  

> 7:

Estimate the response peak (𝑖 (𝑘 ), 𝑗 (𝑘 )) from 𝑺 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑠 (𝑘 )
> 8:

Convert the response peak into image-coordinate displacement 𝒅 (𝑘 ) 

> 9:

Update the target center according to Eq. (12)  

> 10:

Update the target size according to Eq. (13)  

> 11:

return 𝒄 (𝑘 ), 𝒃 (𝑘 )

SiamFC (Bertinetto et al., 2016) is a seminal tracker that uses Siamese matching for visual object tracking. It achieves substantial performance gains while maintaining real-time speed. Given the target template 𝑽 (0) temp extracted from the first frame and a search image from the 𝑘 -th frame, SiamFC uses a shared convolutional backbone 𝜑 (⋅) to extract their feature representations and computes a response map 𝑺 (𝑘 ) by cross-correlation. For a search image 𝑽 (𝑘 )search ,the response map is defined as 

𝑺 (𝑘 ) = 𝜑 

(

𝑽 (0) temp 

)

⋆ 𝜑 

(

𝑽 (𝑘 )search 

)

, (4)  

> Preprint Page 5 of 50

A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

where ⋆ denotes cross-correlation. Each element 𝑺 (𝑘 )(𝑖, 𝑗 ) measures the matching score between the target template and the candidate region corresponding to response-grid location (𝑖, 𝑗 ). The target center is estimated from the peak displacement of the response map. Beyond the response-map computation, SiamFC employs an online inference rule that restricts the search region according to the previous prediction and evaluates multiple candidate scales. Let 

𝒄 (𝑘 −1) = ( 𝑥 (𝑘 −1) center , 𝑦 (𝑘 −1) center )

denote the previously predicted target center, and let 

𝒃 (𝑘 −1) = ( 𝑤 (𝑘 −1) , ℎ (𝑘 −1) )

denote the previous target size. At frame 𝑘 , the nominal search region is centered at 𝒄 (𝑘 −1) , and its spatial extent is chosen proportional to 𝒃 (𝑘 −1) :

𝑽 (𝑘 )search = Crop (𝑽 (𝑘 ), 𝒄 (𝑘 −1) , 𝜍 𝒃 (𝑘 −1) ) , (5) where 𝑽 (𝑘 ) is the current frame, Crop( 𝑽 , 𝒄 , 𝒃 ) extracts an image region centered at 𝒄 with spatial size specified by 𝒃 ,and 𝜍 > 1 is a context factor. To handle scale changes, SiamFC evaluates multiple scaled search regions in parallel. Let the scale-index set be 

 = {− 𝑚, … , −1 , 0, 1, … , 𝑚 }, (6) where 𝑚 ∈ ℕ denotes the number of scale levels on each side of the nominal scale. Let 𝜂 > 1 denote the scale step, so that the scale factor corresponding to 𝑠 ∈  is 𝜂 𝑠 . For each scale index 𝑠 , the scale-specific search image is constructed as 

𝑽 (𝑘 )search ,𝑠 = Resize 𝑅 search 

(Crop (𝑽 (𝑘 ), 𝒄 (𝑘 −1) , 𝜍 𝜂 𝑠 𝒃 (𝑘 −1) )) , (7) where 𝑅 search denotes the fixed search-input resolution of SiamFC, and Resize 𝑅 search (⋅) resizes the cropped region to this resolution. The response map at scale index 𝑠 is then computed as 

𝑺 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑠

= 𝜑 

(

𝑽 (0) temp 

)

⋆ 𝜑 

(

𝑽 (𝑘 )search ,𝑠 

)

. (8) The scale is selected according to the penalized peak response: 

𝑠 (𝑘 ) = arg max 

> 𝑠 ∈

[

𝜋 𝑠 max  

> (𝑖,𝑗 )

𝑺 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑠

(𝑖, 𝑗 )

]

, (9) where 𝜋 𝑠 is the scale-penalty factor for scale index 𝑠 . After selecting 𝑠 (𝑘 ), the response peak 

(𝑖 (𝑘 ), 𝑗 (𝑘 )) = arg max  

> (𝑖,𝑗 )

𝑺 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑠 (𝑘 )

(𝑖, 𝑗 ) (10) is converted into an image-coordinate displacement by the standard SiamFC coordinate mapping: 

𝒅 (𝑘 ) = MapToImage (𝑖 (𝑘 ), 𝑗 (𝑘 ), 𝑠 (𝑘 )) , (11) where MapToImage( ⋅) denotes the conversion from response-grid displacement to image-coordinate displacement under the selected scale. The target center is then updated as 

𝒄 (𝑘 ) = 𝒄 (𝑘 −1) + 𝒅 (𝑘 ). (12) The target size is updated by damped interpolation: 

𝒃 (𝑘 ) = (1 − 𝜁 )𝒃 (𝑘 −1) + 𝜁 𝜂 𝑠 (𝑘 )

𝒃 (𝑘 −1) , (13) 

Preprint Page 6 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

where 𝜁 ∈ (0 , 1] is a damping factor. Equivalently, the two components of 𝒃 (𝑘 ) = ( 𝑤 (𝑘 ), ℎ (𝑘 )) are updated as 

𝑤 (𝑘 ) = (1 − 𝜁 )𝑤 (𝑘 −1) + 𝜁 𝜂 𝑠 (𝑘 )

𝑤 (𝑘 −1) , ℎ(𝑘 ) = (1 − 𝜁 )ℎ(𝑘 −1) + 𝜁 𝜂 𝑠 (𝑘 )

ℎ(𝑘 −1) .

Algorithm 1 summarizes the SiamFC-style online inference procedure used in this paper. For controlled comparison, the same online inference rule is used in the experimental evaluation. From the perspective of ANN–CANN hybridization, SiamFC serves as a representative data-driven ANN estimator. It infers the current target state from appearance matching and produces a discriminative response map over candidate target locations. This frame-wise estimation mechanism provides accurate current-state estimation, while leaving temporally continuous state evolution to be modeled by the CANN branch. 

## 4. Method 

Here, we introduce a systematic ANN–CANN hybridization framework. In Section 4.1, we first formulate VOT as a two-dimensional continuous-state estimation problem and align ANN and CANN branches over the same target-center state space. In Section 4.2, we characterize the bias-variance complementarity between the two branches in an idealized one-step setting. Furthermore, Section 4.3 shows how convex additive fusion can utilize this complementarity to achieve a lower estimation error, thereby realizing functional synergy. Section 4.4 extends the analysis to continuous-time tracking. In Section 4.5, we present HTNN as a concrete tracking architecture that combines a SiamFC-based ANN branch with a training-free CANN branch and implements the theoretical framework through representation-fusion and estimation-fusion. 

4.1. State-Space Alignment of ANNs and CANNs 

We first formulate VOT as the problem of estimating an evolving target state from a video stream. In this work, we focus on the target center 𝒙 ∗(𝑡 ) ∈ ℝ2 as the continuous state in the two-dimensional state space. The tracker is expected to estimate this state as the target moves over time. As described by the 2D-CANN dynamics in Eq. (1) and illustrated in Figure 2(A), the CANN branch represents a continuous state through an activity bump of 𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ). To make this bump follow a moving target, the CANN requires an external input 𝐼 ext (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) to drive its evolution as the target state changes. At time 𝑡 , the value of 𝐼 ext (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) should indicate how likely the target center is to be at candidate state 𝒙 according to the current visual evidence. With this drive, the activity bump is guided toward the target-centered region, so that the bump center can be decoded as the CANN estimate of the current state. Therefore, combining an ANN with a CANN requires the visual branch to provide evidence over the same target-state space. The ANN branch can directly learn from visual data to predict the target center for each input frame. To make this prediction compatible with the CANN input, the ANN can also be trained to output a response map 𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) over candidate target states. Each value of 𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) lies in [0 , 1] and indicates how likely the target center is to be at candidate state 𝒙 at time 𝑡 . Through supervised learning with a Gaussian-shaped target response centered at the annotated target center, 𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) can be optimized to be close to 1 near the ground-truth state and close to 0 at distant states, as shown in Figure 2(B). In the basic aligned formulation, this response map can be directly used as the CANN external input, 

𝐼 ext (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) = 𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ), allowing the ANN-derived visual evidence to drive the CANN bump as the target state changes. Building on the two branches, Figure 2(C) illustrates how the ANN and CANN branches are organized within the aligned framework. At each time 𝑡 , the ANN receives the current visual input and produces a response map 𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ),which serves as the CANN external drive 𝐼 ext (𝒙 , 𝑡 ). The ANN response map can be decoded by arg max to obtain the ANN estimate ̂ 𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 ), while the CANN activity bump can be decoded by its center to obtain the CANN estimate ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 );these two estimates correspond to the same target state and can therefore be fused. Meanwhile, the ANN response map 𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) and the CANN activity bump 𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) can both be viewed as state-space representations with time as an argument, namely functions from ℝ2 ×  to ℝ, where  denotes the time domain. At each (𝒙 , 𝑡 ), their values indicate how strongly each branch supports candidate state 𝒙 at time 𝑡 , which makes them also compatible for fusion before decoding the final target state. Together, this state-space alignment organizes ANN and CANN as two estimation branches for the same continuous target state, providing the basis for analyzing their functional complementarity and how fusion can exploit it. 

4.2. Bias–Variance Complementarity 

The proposed alignment bypasses direct structural coupling between the two heterogeneous modules. However, structural heterogeneity still induces distinct functional roles in state estimation. A non-trivial hybridization, therefore, requires characterizing their estimation properties and explaining how their advantages can be utilized synergistically.  

> Preprint Page 7 of 50

A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking ANN 

Visual Inputs 

State -space Representation  

> CANN
> ……

State -space Repr 

External Drive State Estimation     

> 0.0 0.5 1.0
> How confident is
> the target center
> located at (𝑥 ,𝑦 )?
> ANN
> Dynamics

Visual Input  Response Map 

> train to give

(A) 

(B) 

(C)

> ANN
> argmax
> center

Visual Input   

> CANN
> ……
> State -space
> Representation Current -state
> Estimatio n

Figure 2: State-space alignment of ANNs and CANNs. (A) The CANN represents the target state through an activity bump of 𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ), whose evolution is driven by the external input 𝐼 ext (𝒙 , 𝑡 ). The value of 𝐼 ext (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) indicates how strongly candidate state 𝒙 is supported by the current visual evidence. (B) The ANN maps visual input to a response map 𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 )

over candidate target states, where each value scores how likely the target center is to be located at 𝒙 . (C) The aligned framework organizes the ANN and CANN branches over the same target-state space. The ANN response map 𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 )

serves as the CANN external drive, while both 𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) and the CANN activity bump, denoted as 𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ), can be used as state-space representations for current-state estimation and fusion before final decoding. 

To achieve this, in the following, we first formulate an idealized one-step setting and define the bias and covariance used to quantify their estimation error. After that, we analyze how the response-map peak of the ANN branch yields an asymptotically unbiased current-state estimate and how response-map fluctuations contribute to its variance. Similarly, for the CANN branch, we analyze how finite-time bump evolution introduces a finite-response bias while filtering response-map perturbations through attractor dynamics. Finally, we characterize the complementary error structures of the two estimators as shown in Figure 3(A), thereby identifying their distinct functional advantages. 

One-step tracking setting. Because VOT videos are sampled by cameras at finite frame rates, the continuous evolution of a target is observed through discrete frame transitions. We therefore start from an idealized one-step setting, which captures the elementary estimation problem faced by both branches at each frame transition. Specifically, consider a target moving from the previous state 𝒙 0 to the current state 𝒙 1 = 𝒙 0 + 𝚫 , where 𝒙 0, 𝒙 1, 𝚫 ∈ ℝ2, and define 𝑑 ∶= ‖𝚫 ‖2. The ANN and CANN branches are both treated as estimators of the current state 𝒙 1 under this single-step transition. Expectations, biases, and covariances are taken conditional on the relevant true state or motion when the conditioning variable is clear from context. For an estimator ̂ 𝒙 of 𝒙 1, we write Bias( ̂𝒙 ) ∶= 𝔼 [̂𝒙 ] − 𝒙 1 and 

Cov( ̂𝒙 ) ∶= 𝔼 [( ̂𝒙 − 𝔼 [̂𝒙 ])( ̂ 𝒙 − 𝔼 [̂𝒙 ]) ⊤]. For a vector-valued estimator, its scalar variance is given by the trace of its covariance matrix. 

ANN estimator. We analyze how finite-sample fluctuations in the ANN response map affect the bias and covariance of the ANN estimator in the one-step setting. Let 𝒖 = 𝒙 − 𝒙 1 be the local coordinate, where 𝒙 ∈ ℝ2 denotes a candidate target state. The supervised heatmap is defined as 𝑔 ℎ(𝒙 − 𝒙 ∗) = exp(− ‖𝒙 − 𝒙 ∗‖2∕(2 ℎ2)) , where 𝒙 ∗ is the annotated target center and ℎ > 0 is the heatmap width. We assume isotropic Gaussian annotation noise 𝒙 ∗ ∣ 𝒙 1 ∼  (𝒙 1, 𝜎 2lab 𝐼 2),

Preprint Page 8 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking :Previous State 

Bias ↓

Variance ↑

Bias ↑

Variance ↓

Complementarity 

:Target State  :Estimation 

ANN  CANN 

Bias -Variance  CANN 

ANN 

Convex Additive Fusion 

:Target  :Distractor 

ANN: 

Discrete Shift 

1st -order Filter: 

Strongly Dragged 

CANN: 

Overlap Gated 

(A)  (B) 

(C) 

Remote Spurious Peak Distortion 

(D)  :ANN Estimation 

:CANN Estimation 

discontinuous 

Figure 3: Intuition of bias–variance complementarity, convex additive fusion, and continuous-time tracking stability in ANN–CANN hybridization. (A) In the one-step setting, the ANN estimator provides an asymptotically unbiased current-state estimate but remains sensitive to response-map fluctuations, whereas the CANN estimator can reduce variance through attractor dynamics under suitable dynamical-parameter choices while introducing finite-response lag. (B) Under the bias–variance decomposition of MSE, convex additive fusion balances the complementary error profiles of the two estimators and can achieve a lower estimation error than either pure-estimator endpoint under the derived conditions. (C) Under a remote spurious peak distortion, ANN argmax estimation may jump to the distractor, and a first-order center filter driven by decoded coordinates can be strongly dragged toward the remote peak. In contrast, CANN dynamics receives the full response map, so the remote peak affects the CANN center through a spatial-overlap-gated velocity contribution and is attenuated when its overlap with the current activity bump is weak. (D) Even when ANN argmax estimates switch discontinuously between response peaks, the CANN center evolves through continuous-time dynamics, providing continuous trajectory-level state evolution. 

where 𝜎 2lab is the annotation-noise variance and 𝐼 2 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix. Under squared-loss regression, the Bayes response of the supervised heatmap regression problem is 𝑓 ⋆(𝒖 ) = 𝑀 exp(− ‖𝒖 ‖2∕(2 𝜌 2)) , where 𝜌 2 = ℎ2 + 𝜎 2lab and 

𝑀 > 0 is the induced maximum amplitude. This response represents the ideal local ANN response around the current target state, and the finite-sample analysis below studies how the learned response deviates from it. For an effective training sample size 𝑛 , the learned ANN response is written as 𝑆 (𝑛 ) 

> 𝐴

(𝒖 ) = 𝑓 ⋆(𝒖 ) + 𝛿 𝑛 (𝒖 ). Here, 

𝑆 (𝑛 ) 

> 𝐴

denotes the response map learned from 𝑛 samples, and 𝛿 𝑛 denotes the finite-sample response fluctuation around the Bayes response. Under standard regularity assumptions, √𝑛 𝛿 𝑛 ⇒ 𝐺 in 𝐶 2(), where  is a local neighborhood of 𝟎 , 𝐶 2() is the space of twice continuously differentiable functions on , ⇒ denotes convergence in distribution, and 𝐺 is a zero-mean Gaussian random field. This assumption gives √𝑛 ∇𝛿 𝑛 (𝟎 ) ⇒ ∇𝐺 (𝟎 ) with 𝔼 [∇ 𝐺 (𝟎 )] = 𝟎 . For closed-form constants, we use the local covariance model Cov( 𝐺 (𝒖 ), 𝐺 (𝒗 )) = 𝜎 2 

> 𝐺

exp(− ‖𝒖 − 𝒗 ‖2∕(2 𝜉 2)) , where 𝜎 2 

> 𝐺

> 0

is the fluctuation magnitude and 𝜉 > 0 is the correlation length. We assume 𝜌 > 𝜉 , meaning that the ideal response is broader than the local finite-sample fluctuation. 

Proposition 1 (Asymptotic unbiasedness and covariance of the ANN estimator) . Under the local ANN response model 

𝑆 (𝑛 ) 

> 𝐴

(𝒖 ) = 𝑓 ⋆(𝒖 ) + 𝛿 𝑛 (𝒖 ), with 𝑓 ⋆(𝒖 ) = 𝑀 exp(− ‖𝒖 ‖2∕(2 𝜌 2)) , let ̂ 𝒖 𝐴 be the local maximizer of 𝑆 (𝑛 ) 

> 𝐴

(𝒖 ) around 𝒖 = 𝟎 ,and define the ANN estimator as ̂ 𝒙 𝐴 = 𝒙 1 +̂ 𝒖 𝐴 . Here, 𝑀 is the ideal response amplitude, 𝜌 is the Bayes-response width, 

Preprint Page 9 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

and 𝜎 2 

> 𝐺

and 𝜉 are the fluctuation magnitude and correlation length in the local Gaussian-field covariance model. Then ̂

𝒙 𝐴 = 𝒙 1 + 𝜌 2

𝑀 ∇𝛿 𝑛 (𝟎 ) + 𝑜 𝑝 (𝑛 −1∕2 ), (14) 

where 𝑜 𝑝 (𝑛 −1∕2 ) denotes a stochastic remainder smaller than 𝑛 −1∕2 in probability. Consequently, 

Bias 𝐴 ∶= Bias( ̂𝒙 𝐴 ) = 𝑜 (𝑛 −1∕2 ), (15) 

and 

Σ𝐴 ∶= Cov( ̂𝒙 𝐴 ∣ 𝒙 1) = 𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝑛 𝜌 4

𝑀 2𝜉 2 𝐼 2 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (16) 

where 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ) denotes a deterministic remainder smaller than 𝑛 −1 . Thus 

𝑠 𝐴 ∶= tr(Σ 𝐴 ) = 2𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝜌 4

𝑛𝑀 2𝜉 2 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (17) Proposition 1 connects the finite-sample fluctuation of the ANN response map to the error of its argmax-based estimate. Since the local maximizer is displaced by ∇𝛿 𝑛 (𝟎 ), whose limiting distribution has zero mean, the relation 

Bias 𝐴 = 𝑜 (𝑛 −1∕2 ) shows that the ANN estimator is asymptotically unbiased: as the effective training sample size 𝑛 grows, the expected displacement of ̂ 𝒙 𝐴 from the current state 𝒙 1 vanishes. At the same time, Σ𝐴 quantifies how finite-sample response fluctuations perturb the argmax-based estimate. Thus, in the one-step setting, the ANN branch provides an asymptotically unbiased current-state estimate, while its estimate remains sensitive to local response-map fluctuations. 

CANN estimator. We next analyze how CANN dynamics transform the same response-map fluctuation into the bias and covariance of the CANN estimator. Under the aligned formulation, the ANN response map serves as the CANN external drive, 𝐼 ext (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) = 𝑆 (𝑛 ) 

> 𝐴

(𝒙 , 𝑡 ). Since 𝑆 (𝑛 ) 

> 𝐴

= 𝑓 ⋆ + 𝛿 𝑛 , the CANN receives both the ideal target-centered response and the finite-sample fluctuation 𝛿 𝑛 . In a 2D-CANN, a small perturbation to the activity bump can either shift the bump center or deform its shape. The center shift is governed by the perturbation components along the two translational modes, whereas non-translational deformation components are suppressed by recurrent dynamics in the local perturbation regime. Let 𝑟 1 and 𝑟 2 denote the two translational modes associated with shifts along the two state-space coordinates. We define 𝑎 1,𝑛 ∶= ⟨𝛿 𝑛 , 𝑟 1⟩, 𝑎 2,𝑛 ∶= ⟨𝛿 𝑛 , 𝑟 2⟩, and 𝒂 𝑛 = ( 𝑎 1,𝑛 , 𝑎 2,𝑛 )⊤, where ⟨⋅, ⋅⟩ denotes the 𝐿 2

inner product over the state space. Let 𝒚 (𝑡 ) = ( 𝑦 1(𝑡 ), 𝑦 2(𝑡 )) ⊤ denote the displacement of the CANN bump center relative to the current state 𝒙 1. At the beginning of the response window, the bump is centered at the previous state 𝒙 0, so 𝒚 (0) = 𝒙 0 − 𝒙 1 = − 𝚫 . The local perturbation dynamics of the center displacement can be written as ̇ 𝑦 𝑖 = − 𝛽𝑦 𝑖 + 𝛾 dyn 𝑎 𝑖,𝑛 + 𝑜 𝑝 (𝑛 −1∕2 ) for 𝑖 = 1 , 2.Here, 𝛽 = 8 𝑀𝑎 2𝜌 2∕[ 𝜏 𝑐 𝑈 0(𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2] and 𝛾 dyn = √2∕ 𝜋 ∕( 𝜏 𝑐 𝑈 0), where 𝑎 is the CANN bump width, 𝑈 0 is the bump amplitude, and 𝜏 𝑐 is the CANN time constant defined in Eq. (1) . For a fixed response time 𝑇 , define 𝛼 = 𝑒 −𝛽𝑇 . The CANN estimate after this response window is ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 = 𝒙 1 + 𝒚 (𝑇 ).

Proposition 2 (Finite-response bias and covariance of the CANN estimator) . Under the aligned formulation, the CANN branch is driven by the ANN response map 𝐼 ext = 𝑆 (𝑛 ) 

> 𝐴

. Around the current state 𝒙 1, write 𝑆 (𝑛 ) 

> 𝐴

= 𝑓 ⋆ + 𝛿 𝑛 , where 𝑓 ⋆ is the target-centered Bayes response and 𝛿 𝑛 is the finite-sample response fluctuation. Let 𝑟 1 and 𝑟 2 be the two translational modes of the CANN bump, and set 𝑎 𝑖,𝑛 ∶= ⟨𝛿 𝑛 , 𝑟 𝑖 ⟩ for 𝑖 = 1 , 2, with 𝒂 𝑛 = ( 𝑎 1,𝑛 , 𝑎 2,𝑛 )⊤. Let ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 be the CANN estimate obtained from the bump center after response time 𝑇 , with residual response factor 𝛼 = 𝑒 −𝛽𝑇 . Then ̂

𝒙 𝐶 = 𝒙 1 − 𝛼 𝚫 + 1 − 𝛼 𝛽 𝛾 dyn 𝒂 𝑛 + 𝑜 𝑝 (𝑛 −1∕2 ). (18) 

Consequently, 

Bias 𝐶 ∶= Bias( ̂𝒙 𝐶 ) = − 𝛼 𝚫 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1∕2 ), (19)  

> Preprint Page 10 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking

and 

Σ𝐶 ∶= Cov( ̂𝒙 𝐶 ∣ 𝚫 ) = 𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝑛 (1 − 𝛼 )2 𝜉 2(𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)4

𝑀 2𝜌 4(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2)2 𝐼 2 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (20) 

Thus 

𝑠 𝐶 ∶= tr(Σ 𝐶 ) = 2𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝑛 (1 − 𝛼 )2 𝜉 2(𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)4

𝑀 2𝜌 4(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2)2 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (21) Proposition 2 connects finite-time bump evolution and translational-mode projection to the error of the CANN estimate. The term −𝛼 𝚫 shows the finite-response bias: after a finite response time 𝑇 , the initial displacement from the previous state is attenuated but not fully eliminated. The stochastic term is determined by 𝒂 𝑛 , which is the projection of the ANN response fluctuation onto the CANN translational modes. Under the zero-mean fluctuation model above, this projected fluctuation does not introduce a persistent systematic displacement, but it contributes to the covariance Σ𝐶 .Thus, in the one-step setting, the CANN branch provides a biased estimate with temporal lag, while its covariance is shaped by how attractor dynamics filter response-map fluctuations through the bump-center modes. 

Bias–variance complementarity. The preceding results show that the ANN and CANN estimators have complemen-tary error structures in the one-step setting. In terms of bias, the ANN estimator has Bias 𝐴 = 𝑜 (𝑛 −1∕2 ), so its expected estimate approaches the current state 𝒙 1 as the effective training sample size increases, while the CANN estimator carries the finite-response bias −𝛼 𝚫 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1∕2 ) caused by incomplete bump convergence within the response window. In terms of variance, comparing Eq. (16) and Eq. (20) gives 

Σ𝐶 =̄𝜅 2Σ𝐴 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ), 𝑠 𝐶 =̄𝜅 2𝑠 𝐴 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ), (22) where ̄𝜅 = (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝜉 2(𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2

𝜌 4(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2) . (23) Thus, when the CANN parameters satisfy ̄𝜅 < 1 , the CANN estimator has a smaller variance term than the ANN estimator in this local perturbation model. The parameter 𝑎 controls how the response-map fluctuation overlaps with the translational modes of the bump, and the response time 𝑇 enters through 𝛼 = 𝑒 −𝛽𝑇 , which also determines the finite-response bias. A simple sufficient condition for ̄𝜅 < 1 is 

𝑎 2 < 𝜌 2(𝜌 2 − 𝜉 2)

𝜉 2 . (24) Together with the factor (1 − 𝛼 )2, this condition specifies a regime in which CANN dynamics attenuates the variance induced by local response-map fluctuations. Together, this idealized one-step analysis establishes the bias–variance complementarity illustrated in Figure 3(A). The ANN branch provides an asymptotically unbiased current-state estimate, whereas the CANN branch can provide a lower-variance estimate through dynamical-parameter design, at the cost of finite-response lag. This complementary error structure identifies the functional role of each branch in a setting matched to frame-based VOT. Detailed derivations of this one-step bias–variance analysis are provided in Appendix A.1. 

4.3. Functional Synergy through Additive Fusion 

Having identified the bias–variance complementarity between ANN and CANN estimators, we next show how convex additive fusion can utilize their complementary advantages to realize functional synergy in ANN–CANN hybridization. We use the mean-squared error (MSE) of the current-state estimate as the performance measure, with the bias–variance decomposition MSE( ̂𝒙 ) = ‖ Bias( ̂ 𝒙 )‖2 + tr(Cov( ̂ 𝒙 )) .In the following, we first derive the MSE of a convex combination of the ANN and CANN estimates. We then examine how adding a small contribution from the other branch improves each endpoint estimator. Finally, we show that, under suitable dynamical-parameter choices, a convex fusion weight can achieve a smaller MSE than either individual branch, as illustrated in Figure 3(B).  

> Preprint Page 11 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking

MSE of additive fusion. We derive the MSE of a convex additive estimator that combines the ANN and CANN estimates in the shared target-state space. Since ̂ 𝒙 𝐴 and ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 estimate the same current state 𝒙 1, we define ̂

𝒙 𝐻 (𝜆 ) = 𝜆̂ 𝒙 𝐴 + (1 − 𝜆 )̂𝒙 𝐶 , 𝜆 ∈ [0 , 1] . (25) Here, 𝜆 = 1 recovers the ANN estimator, 𝜆 = 0 recovers the CANN estimator, and 𝜆 ∈ (0 , 1) gives a convex fusion of the two estimates. Because the same response-map fluctuation affects both the ANN argmax-based estimate and the CANN bump-center estimate, their stochastic errors are correlated. Let ̃ 𝒆 𝐴 ∶= ̂ 𝒙 𝐴 − 𝔼 [̂ 𝒙 𝐴 ] and ̃ 𝒆 𝐶 ∶= ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 − 𝔼 [̂ 𝒙 𝐶 ] denote the centered stochastic errors of the two estimators. Define Σ𝐴𝐶 ∶= 𝔼 [̃𝒆 𝐴 ̃ 𝒆 ⊤𝐶 ] and 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 ∶= tr(Σ 𝐴𝐶 ). Under the local fluctuation model above, the cross term satisfies 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 = 𝜒 𝐴𝐶 

√𝑠 𝐴 𝑠 𝐶 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ), where 𝜒 𝐴𝐶 = 𝜉 2(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2)∕( 𝜉 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2 ∈ (0 , 1) .Using the bias and covariance results derived above, the MSE of the convex additive estimator is 

MSE 𝐻 (𝜆 ) = (1 − 𝜆 )2𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝜆 2𝑠 𝐴 + (1 − 𝜆 )2𝑠 𝐶 + 2 𝜆 (1 − 𝜆 )𝑠 𝐴𝐶 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (26) The first term is the retained CANN finite-response bias, the next two terms are the scalar variances of the ANN and CANN estimators, and the last term accounts for their shared response-map fluctuation. Thus, 𝜆 controls how the fusion balances the ANN estimator’s low bias and the CANN estimator’s dynamically shaped variance. 

Endpoint improvement. We next examine the two pure-estimator endpoints of the convex fusion, namely 𝜆 = 1 for the ANN estimator and 𝜆 = 0 for the CANN estimator, and ask whether a small contribution from the other branch can reduce the MSE. Near the ANN endpoint, let 𝜆 = 1 − 𝜖 with 0 < 𝜖 ≪ 1. Then 

MSE 𝐻 (1 − 𝜖 ) − MSE 𝐻 (1) = −2 𝜖 (𝑠 𝐴 − 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 ) + 𝑂 (𝜖 2). (27) Thus, a small CANN contribution improves the ANN endpoint when 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐴 . This condition follows from the variance-reduction regime identified above: if ̄𝜅 < 1 , then 𝑠 𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐴 , and together with 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 = 𝜒 𝐴𝐶 

√𝑠 𝐴 𝑠 𝐶 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ) and 

𝜒 𝐴𝐶 ∈ (0 , 1) , it yields 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐴 .Near the CANN endpoint, let 𝜆 = 𝜖 with 0 < 𝜖 ≪ 1. Then 

MSE 𝐻 (𝜖 ) − MSE 𝐻 (0) = −2 𝜖 (𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝑠 𝐶 − 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 ) + 𝑂 (𝜖 2). (28) The ANN contribution reduces the retained CANN lag term while also changing the stochastic term. A sufficient condition for local improvement, independent of the motion magnitude 𝑑 , is 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐶 . This condition can be achieved by choosing the response time 𝑇 such that 

𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2

𝜉 2 + 2 𝑎 2 <

√

1 − 𝛼 𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2

𝜌 2 . (29) When 𝜌 2 < 𝜉 2 + 2 𝑎 2, a sufficiently long response time makes 1 − 𝛼 = 1 − 𝑒 −𝛽𝑇 close enough to 1 to satisfy Eq. (29) .These endpoint expansions show that neither pure estimator is locally fixed under the complementary error structure: a small CANN contribution can improve the ANN endpoint, and a small ANN contribution can improve the CANN endpoint under the stated conditions. This motivates considering convex weights away from the two endpoints, which we formalize next. 

Convex fusion yields synergy. The endpoint expansions show that, under suitable dynamical-parameter choices, moving away from either pure-estimator endpoint can reduce the MSE. We now convert this local endpoint observation into a convex-fusion result by minimizing the quadratic part of Eq. (26). 

Theorem 1 (Convex additive fusion under dynamical-parameter design) . Let the squared one-step target displacement be 𝑑 ∶= ‖𝚫 ‖2, and let the CANN finite-response factor after response time 𝑇 be 𝛼 ∶= 𝑒 −𝛽𝑇 ∈ (0 , 1) . Let the scalar variance and cross-covariance terms be 𝑠 𝐴 ∶= tr(Σ 𝐴 ), 𝑠 𝐶 ∶= tr(Σ 𝐶 ), and 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 ∶= tr(Σ 𝐴𝐶 ). Define 

𝑄 𝐻 ∶= 𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝑠 𝐴 + 𝑠 𝐶 − 2 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 . (30)  

> Preprint Page 12 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking

Suppose the bump width 𝑎 and response time 𝑇 are chosen so that 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐴 and 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐶 . Then 𝑄 𝐻 > 0, and the minimizer of the quadratic part of Eq. (26) is 

𝜆 ⋆ = 𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝑠 𝐶 − 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 

𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝑠 𝐴 + 𝑠 𝐶 − 2 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 

. (31) 

Moreover, 𝜆 ⋆ ∈ (0 , 1) , and the MSE at 𝜆 ⋆ is smaller than the MSE at both pure-estimator endpoints 𝜆 = 1 and 𝜆 = 0 ,up to the 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ) remainder in Eq. (26) .

The inequalities 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐴 and 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐶 make both sides of the convex optimum positive: the numerator of 𝜆 ⋆ is 

𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝑠 𝐶 − 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 > 0, and 1 − 𝜆 ⋆ = ( 𝑠 𝐴 − 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 )∕ 𝑄 𝐻 > 0. They also give 𝑄 𝐻 = ( 𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝑠 𝐶 − 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 ) + ( 𝑠 𝐴 − 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 ) > 0,so the optimum lies strictly between the two endpoints. Under the scale assumption 𝜌 > 𝜉 , the feasible design range 

𝜌 2 − 𝜉 2

2 < 𝑎 2 < 𝜌 2(𝜌 2 − 𝜉 2)

𝜉 2 (32) allows the two inequalities to be jointly satisfied when 𝑇 is sufficiently large. Theorem 1 formalizes the intuition in Figure 3(B). The convex weight 𝜆 ⋆ balances the asymptotically unbiased ANN estimate with the lower-variance CANN estimate obtained under suitable dynamical-parameter choices, while accounting for finite-response lag and shared response-map fluctuations. Thus, once the two branches are aligned in the same target-state space, additive fusion provides a simple mechanism for utilizing their complementary error structures. In the idealized one-step setting, this realizes functional synergy in ANN–CANN hybridization. The proof is given in Appendix A.2. 

4.4. Continuous-Time Dynamics for Stable Tracking 

The one-step analysis above shows how ANN and CANN estimates complement each other in bias and variance, and how convex additive fusion can utilize this complementarity at the estimation level. Real tracking further requires the estimated state to evolve coherently over time and to remain stable when the ANN response is distorted by distractors. We therefore extend the analysis to continuous-time dynamics. In the following, we first show that, in a local constant-velocity regime, CANN center dynamics preserves the same bias–variance complementarity and supports synergistic fusion over time. We then analyze a spurious remote peak regime, where CANN dynamics suppresses distractor-induced pulls and maintains continuous center evolution, as illustrated in Figure 3(C) and (D). Finally, we explain why stable estimation should fuse the ANN response map and the CANN activity bump before final decoding. 

Local continuous-time complementarity and synergy. We first show that the ANN and CANN branch retains bias–variance complementarity and supports convex fusion in a local continuous-time regime. Let 𝒙 ∗(𝑡 ) ∈ ℝ2 denote the ground-truth target trajectory, and write the ANN estimate as ̂ 𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 ) = 𝒙 ∗(𝑡 ) + 𝜺 (𝑡 ), where 𝜺 (𝑡 ) is the ANN estimation error. We assume 𝔼 [𝜺 (𝑡 )] = 𝟎 , Cov( 𝜺 (𝑡 )) = 𝜎 2

> 𝐴

𝐼 2, and Cov( 𝜺 (𝑡 ), 𝜺 (𝑠 )) = 𝜎 2

> 𝐴

𝑒 −𝜂 𝜀 |𝑡 −𝑠 |𝐼 2, where 𝜎 2 

> 𝐴

> 0 is the instantaneous error variance and 𝜂 𝜀 > 0 is the temporal decorrelation rate. Under the local constant-velocity approximation 𝒙 ∗(𝑡 ) = 𝒙 ∗(0) + 𝒗 𝑡 , where 𝒗 ∈ ℝ2 is the local target velocity, the translational-mode reduction of the CANN center dynamics gives 

𝜏 ct ̇̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ) + ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ) = ̂ 𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 ), (33) where ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ) is the CANN center estimate and 𝜏 ct > 0 is the effective center-dynamics time constant. Taking bias relative to the ground-truth state 𝒙 ∗(𝑡 ), this local model gives 

Bias 𝐴 (𝑡 ) = 𝟎 , Cov( ̂𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 )) = 𝜎 2

> 𝐴

𝐼 2,

Bias 𝐶 (𝑡 ) = − 𝜏 ct 𝒗 , Cov( ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 )) = 𝜎 2

> 𝐴

1 + 𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct 

𝐼 2. (34) Thus, the ANN branch provides an unbiased instantaneous estimate but retains the full temporal fluctuation, whereas the CANN branch reduces this fluctuation by the factor (1 + 𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct )−1 while introducing the velocity-dependent lag 

−𝜏 ct 𝒗 . This gives the continuous-time counterpart of the one-step bias–variance complementarity.  

> Preprint Page 13 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking

The same local model also shows how this complementarity can be utilized by convex fusion over time. For ̂

𝒙 𝐻 (𝑡 ; 𝜆 ) = 𝜆̂ 𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 ) + (1 − 𝜆 )̂𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ), with 𝜆 ∈ [0 , 1] , the MSE in this local regime is 

MSE ct  

> 𝐻

(𝜆 ) = (1 − 𝜆 )2𝜏 2ct ‖𝒗 ‖2 + 𝜆 2𝑠 ct  

> 𝐴

+ (1 − 𝜆 )2𝑠 ct  

> 𝐶

+ 2 𝜆 (1 − 𝜆 )𝑠 ct  

> 𝐴𝐶

, (35) where 𝑠 ct  

> 𝐴

= 2 𝜎 2

> 𝐴

, 𝑠 ct  

> 𝐶

= 2 𝜎 2

> 𝐴

∕(1 + 𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct ), and 𝑠 ct  

> 𝐴𝐶

= 2 𝜎 2

> 𝐴

∕(1 + 𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct ). The first term is the retained CANN lag, while the remaining terms describe how the ANN fluctuation and the CANN-smoothed fluctuation are combined. Minimizing this quadratic MSE gives the convex weight 

𝜆 ⋆ 

> ct

= 𝜏 2ct ‖𝒗 ‖2

𝜏 2ct ‖𝒗 ‖2 + 2 𝜎 2

> 𝐴

𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct ∕(1 + 𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct ) . (36) When ‖𝒗 ‖ > 0 and 𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct > 0, we have 𝜆 ⋆ 

> ct

∈ (0 , 1) , so the local continuous-time optimum uses both the ANN and CANN estimates. Therefore, in the local continuous-time regime, convex fusion can balance the ANN branch’s unbiased but fluctuating estimate with the CANN branch’s smoother but lagged estimate. 

Spurious remote-peak suppression. We next show that, beyond the local temporal smoothing captured by a first-order center filter, CANN dynamics supports stable tracking by suppressing remote spurious peaks and maintaining continuous center evolution. Consider an ANN response map containing one target peak and one remote distractor peak: 

𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) = 𝐴 ∗𝑒 −‖𝒙 −𝒙 ∗(𝑡 )‖2∕(2 𝜔 2∗) + 𝐴 𝑠 𝑒 −‖𝒙 −𝒙 𝑠 (𝑡 )‖2∕(2 𝜔 2 

> 𝑠 )

. (37) Here, the first peak is centered at the target state 𝒙 ∗(𝑡 ) with amplitude 𝐴 ∗ > 0 and width 𝜔 ∗ > 0, while the second peak is centered at a remote distractor 𝒙 𝑠 (𝑡 ) with amplitude 𝐴 𝑠 > 0 and width 𝜔 𝑠 > 0. The ANN argmax estimate ̂

𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 ) = arg max 𝒙 𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) may abruptly jump to the distractor when the remote peak becomes dominant. The CANN branch receives the full response map rather than only the decoded ANN coordinate. When the CANN maintains a localized activity bump, we use the single-bump approximation 𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) ≈ ̃ 𝑈 (𝒙 −̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 )) , where ̃𝑈 (𝒖 ) = 𝑈 0𝑒 −‖𝒖 ‖2∕(4 𝑎 2),̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ) is the CANN center estimate, 𝑈 0 is the bump amplitude, and 𝑎 is the bump width. Let 

𝑟 𝑠 (𝑡 ) = ‖𝒙 𝑠 (𝑡 ) − ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 )‖ denote the distance between the remote distractor peak and the current CANN center. Projecting the spurious Gaussian peak 𝐴 𝑠 𝑒 −‖𝒙 −𝒙 𝑠 (𝑡 )‖2∕(2 𝜔 2  

> 𝑠 )

onto the CANN translational modes gives the following contribution to the CANN center dynamics: ̇̂ 

𝒙 𝐶,𝑠 (𝑡 ) = 𝛽 𝑠 exp 

(

− 𝑟 𝑠 (𝑡 )2

2( 𝜔 2 

> 𝑠

+ 2 𝑎 2)

) (𝒙 𝑠 (𝑡 ) − ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 )), 𝛽 𝑠 = 8𝐴 𝑠 𝑎 2𝜔 2

> 𝑠

𝜏 𝑐 𝑈 0(𝜔 2 

> 𝑠

+ 2 𝑎 2)2 . (38) Here, ̇̂ 𝒙 𝐶,𝑠 (𝑡 ) denotes the component of the CANN center velocity induced by the spurious peak. Its magnitude is 

‖̇̂ 𝒙 𝐶,𝑠 (𝑡 )‖ = 𝛽 𝑠 𝑟 𝑠 (𝑡 ) exp 

(

− 𝑟 𝑠 (𝑡 )2

2( 𝜔 2 

> 𝑠

+ 2 𝑎 2)

)

. (39) The factor 𝑟 𝑠 (𝑡 ) exp[− 𝑟 𝑠 (𝑡 )2∕(2( 𝜔 2 

> 𝑠

+ 2 𝑎 2))] increases only up to 𝑟 𝑠 (𝑡 ) = 

√

𝜔 2 

> 𝑠

+ 2 𝑎 2 and then decays as the distractor moves farther away from the current CANN center. Thus, the remote spurious peak affects the CANN estimate through an overlap-gated velocity contribution. Its influence is suppressed by the weak spatial overlap between the remote response peak and the current activity bump. This mechanism differs from directly filtering the decoded ANN coordinate. For a first-order center filter ̇̂ 

𝒙 𝐹 (𝑡 ) = 𝛽 0(̂ 𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 ) − ̂ 𝒙 𝐹 (𝑡 )) with 𝛽 0 > 0, an ANN jump to 𝒙 𝑠 (𝑡 ) produces a pull proportional to ‖𝒙 𝑠 (𝑡 ) − ̂ 𝒙 𝐹 (𝑡 )‖.In contrast, the CANN pull caused by the same remote peak is proportional to 𝑟 𝑠 (𝑡 ) exp[− 𝑟 𝑠 (𝑡 )2∕(2( 𝜔 2 

> 𝑠

+ 2 𝑎 2))] , and is therefore attenuated at large offsets, as illustrated in Figure 3(C). The same continuous-time dynamics also support stable tracking by enforcing continuous center evolution. Even if the ANN argmax estimate ̂ 𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 ) = arg max 𝒙 𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) switches abruptly between the target peak and a remote spurious peak, the CANN center is governed by a continuous-time dynamical system. Under mild regularity conditions on the response amplitudes, peak locations, and mode-reduction remainder, ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ) is locally absolutely continuous. That is, the CANN estimate remains continuous and differentiable almost everywhere, preventing the instantaneous coordinate jumps that may appear in ANN argmax estimation. This continuous center evolution provides the second stability mechanism illustrated in Figure 3(D).  

> Preprint Page 14 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking

Estimation fusion for stable tracking. We finally show that stable estimation should combine the ANN response map and the CANN activity bump before final decoding, rather than directly fusing their peak- or center-decoded estimates. When both branches are locally concentrated around the target state and have comparable local shapes, this operation is consistent with the convex additive estimator analyzed above: ̂

𝒙 𝐻 (𝑡 ) = arg max 

> 𝒙

{𝜆𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) + (1 − 𝜆 )𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 )} ≈ 𝜆̂ 𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 ) + (1 − 𝜆 )̂𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ), (40) where 𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) is the CANN activity bump and 𝜆 ∈ [0 , 1] is the fusion weight. Thus, in the local unimodal regime, combining the two scalar fields before decoding recovers the convex additive estimate used in the MSE analysis. When a remote spurious peak appears, this local approximation no longer holds. If the ANN argmax estimate jumps to the distractor while the CANN center remains near the target-side activity bump, directly averaging the decoded estimates can produce an intermediate state that is not supported by either branch. We therefore form the fused score before final decoding: 

𝑆 𝐻 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) = 𝜆𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) + (1 − 𝜆 )𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ),̂ 𝒙 𝐻 (𝑡 ) = arg max  

> 𝒙

𝑆 𝐻 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ). (41) The remote ANN peak receives weak support from the CANN activity bump because of their small spatial overlap, whereas the target-side response is reinforced near the current CANN center. Thus, this estimation-fusion rule inherits the remote-peak suppression and continuous center evolution analyzed above, providing a stable final state estimate under distractor-induced response distortions. Overall, this continuous-time analysis extends the complementarity and synergy in one-step analysis to trajectory-level stable tracking. In the local regime, the ANN–CANN pair retains complementary error profiles that can be balanced by convex fusion, while in the spurious remote-peak regime, the CANN activity bump suppresses distractor-induced pulls through spatial-overlap gating and maintains continuous center evolution. These mechanisms support the fusion of the ANN response map and the CANN activity bump for stable state estimation. The detailed derivations are given in Appendix A.3. 

4.5. Architecture of HTNN 

Driven by the theoretical insights into bias–variance complementarity, functional synergy, and stable-tracking mechanisms, we propose the HTNN model for visual tracking. The HTNN comprises a SiamFC-based ANN branch and a training-free CANN branch. The ANN branch converts visual observations from the current frame into response maps over the target-center state space. The CANN branch receives external drives constructed from these response maps across frames and evolves an activity bump over the shared state space. As shown in Figure 4, the two branches are connected through a theory-guided two-stage fusion design. Representation-fusion combines the ANN response map with a motion cue to construct a more reliable CANN external drive. Estimation-fusion combines the ANN response map and the CANN activity bump before final target-state decoding. This design follows the state-space alignment in Section 4.1, the additive-fusion analysis in Section 4.3, and the continuous-time tracking analysis in Section 4.4. 

ANN branch and representation-fusion. The ANN branch provides current-frame visual evidence over candidate target-center states, and representation-fusion converts this evidence into the external drive for CANN evolution. Following the SiamFC tracking paradigm in 3.2, the initial template image 𝑽 (0) temp and the search region 𝑽 (𝑘 )search at frame 

𝑘 are processed by a shared backbone 𝜑 (⋅). The ANN response map is computed by cross-correlation: 

𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐴

= 𝜑 (𝑽 (0) temp ) ⋆ 𝜑 (𝑽 (𝑘 )search ). (42) Here, 𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐴

(𝒙 ) represents the response map that matches evidence whether the target center is located at candidate state 

𝒙 ∈ ℝ2. The ANN estimate can be decoded as ̂ 𝒙 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐴

= arg max 𝒙 𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐴

(𝒙 ). In HTNN, the same response map also provides the visual evidence used to construct the CANN external drive. Representation-fusion constructs this external drive by combining appearance-based matching evidence with local motion information. In practical tracking, 𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐴

may contain scattered activations or spurious peaks caused by background texture, target deformation, or appearance ambiguity. Although CANN dynamics can suppress remote spurious peaks, an overly scattered drive may still introduce additional perturbations into bump evolution. A motion cue 𝑀 (𝑘 ) ∶ ℝ2 → ℝ

is therefore introduced to modulate the ANN response using local inter-frame changes. In implementation, 𝑀 (𝑘 ) is  

> Preprint Page 15 of 50

A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking Template     

> Search Region
> Feature
> Backbone
> Backbone
> Template Feature
> Motion Feature
> Gaussian
> Blur
> Cross
> Correlation
> Representation -fusion CANN
> Dynamics
> Over Frames
> Shared
> Weights
> Input
> Network
> CANN Estimation
> Search Region
> ANN Response
> CANN Estimation
> Estimation -fusion
> Trajectory
> Two -stage Fusion
> Local
> Activation
> Population Response
> ……
> Kernel
> Global
> Inhibition
> Output
> Input
> CANN Branch ANN Branch
> Frame
> Difference
> Search Region

Figure 4: Architecture of HTNN. The ANN branch follows a SiamFC-style tracking pipeline, where the template and search region are processed by shared backbones and their cross-correlation produces an ANN response map. Representation-fusion combines the ANN response map with a motion cue extracted from adjacent search regions to construct the CANN external drive. The CANN branch evolves an activity bump through local excitation and global inhibition over the same target-center state space. Estimation-fusion then combines the ANN response map and the evolved CANN activity bump before final target-state decoding. The final state estimate is obtained by applying an argmax operation to the fused score. 

computed from the frame difference between 𝑽 (𝑘 )search and 𝑽 (𝑘 −1) search , followed by Gaussian smoothing. The CANN external drive is then constructed as 

𝐼 (𝑘 )ext = 𝜈 𝐴 𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐴

+ 𝜈 𝑀 𝑀 (𝑘 ) + 𝜈 𝐴𝑀 

(𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐴

⊙ 𝑀 (𝑘 )), (43) where 𝜈 𝐴 , 𝜈 𝑀 , and 𝜈 𝐴𝑀 are scalar representation-fusion coefficients, and ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication. This construction keeps the drive in the same target-center state space and provides the CANN branch with evidence that is more concentrated around visually and temporally supported target regions. 

CANN branch and estimation-fusion. The CANN branch evolves an activity bump over the same target-center state space as the ANN response map. Following the discrete CANN implementation introduced in Section 3.1, the external drive 𝐼 (𝑘 )ext is mapped onto the 𝑁 × 𝑁 toroidal grid. The CANN state is then iteratively updated according to Eq. (3) . For each video frame, 𝑰 (𝑘 )ext is held fixed during a finite response window of 𝐿 update steps. This response window corresponds to response time 𝑇 = 𝐿 Δ𝑡 . After CANN evolution, we denote the evolved activity bump as 

𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐶

(𝒙 ) ∶= 𝑈 (𝑘 )(𝒙 , 𝑇 ), and the CANN estimate can be decoded as ̂ 𝒙 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐶

= arg max 𝒙 𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐶

(𝒙 ).Estimation-fusion combines the ANN response map and the evolved CANN activity bump before final decoding. Since both scalar fields are defined over the same target-center state space, HTNN computes 

𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐻

= 𝜆𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐴

+ (1 − 𝜆 )𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐶

, 𝜆 ∈ [0 , 1] , (44) and decodes the final target center as ̂

𝒙 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐻

= arg max  

> 𝒙

𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐻

(𝒙 ). (45) This fusion uses current-frame visual evidence from the ANN branch and the temporally evolved activity bump from the CANN branch. As discussed in Sections 4.3 and 4.4, estimation-fusion follows the functional-synergy analysis of convex additive fusion and the continuous-time stable-tracking mechanism of CANN dynamics. By combining the ANN response map with the evolved CANN activity bump before decoding, it can reduce estimation error while preserving response support under remote distractors, yielding a more stable and accurate final tracking estimate. 

Preprint Page 16 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 

> N
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> Time per Iteration (ms)
> FFT
> Conv, K=N
> Conv, K=N/2
> Conv, K=N/4
> Conv, K=N/8

Figure 5: Efficiency comparison of recurrent convolution implementations in CANN inference. Runtime is measured and averaged for one recurrent convolution with batch size 32. The red curve denotes the FFT-based implementation, which computes the exact circular convolution on the toroidal grid. The blue curves denote direct or truncated convolution with different kernel sizes 𝐾 . The benchmark deliberately uses prime grid sizes to avoid cuFFT-favorable sizes of the form 

2𝑎 3𝑏 5𝑐 7𝑑 , giving a conservative setting for FFT acceleration. 

Overall training procedure and inference acceleration approach. In HTNN, the ANN branch is trained from template–search pairs with dense response-map supervision, whereas the CANN branch is integrated as a training-free dynamical module. Its recurrent structure is specified by the CANN dynamics and contains a small set of dynamical parameters, including the bump width 𝑎 , the time constant 𝜏 𝑐 , the inhibition strength 𝑘 , the input gain 𝐴 , and the response time 𝑇 . These parameters control the lag term, the variance term, and the response-map dynamics analyzed in Sections 4.2–4.4. They are selected designed parameters rather than learned by backpropagation. Therefore, HTNN does not require end-to-end optimization of the full ANN–CANN system. For efficient inference, we introduce an acceleration approach that uses the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to compute recurrent CANN updates exactly on the toroidal grid. The computational bottleneck is the recurrent convolution term 

𝑱 ⊛ 𝒓 in Eq. (3) , which requires 𝑂 (𝑁 4) time per update step under direct convolution on an 𝑁 × 𝑁 response grid. This cost becomes significant because the CANN state is updated for multiple recurrent steps within each video frame. A common alternative is truncated convolution, which reduces the runtime to 𝑂 (𝑁 2𝐾 2) by limiting the effective kernel size to 𝐾 . However, truncation changes the original recurrent dynamics by restricting the spatial range of interaction, and its efficiency depends on the chosen kernel size. In contrast, the toroidal-grid implementation makes the recurrent term a circular convolution, which can be computed in the frequency domain as 

𝑱 ⊛ 𝒓 =  −1 ( (𝑱 ) ⊙  (𝒓 )) , (46) where  and  −1 denote the two-dimensional FFT and its inverse. This reduces each CANN update to 𝑂 (𝑁 2 log 𝑁 )

time while preserving the discrete circular-convolution dynamics on the toroidal grid. Since the recurrent kernel 𝑱 is fixed after the CANN parameters are selected,  (𝑱 ) is precomputed and reused during inference. Figure 5 compares FFT-based convolution with direct and truncated convolution implementations. Direct convolution becomes rapidly more expensive as the response-grid size increases. Truncated convolution reduces the cost by using a smaller kernel, but even the strongly truncated 𝐾 = 𝑁 ∕8 setting only approaches the FFT runtime in the small-𝑁 range and does so by substantially restricting the original recurrent interaction range. Across the tested response-grid sizes, the FFT-based implementation is approximately 10 1–10 3 times faster than the truncated and direct alternatives while preserving the exact circular convolution. Thus, HTNN uses FFT-based circular convolution as its exact acceleration route for efficient recurrent CANN inference. 

Preprint Page 17 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking                                

> Table 1
> Statistics of the testing datasets used in our evaluation.
> Dataset Videos Frames FPS
> OTB50 50 27K Not specified a
> OTB100 100 59K Not specified GOT-10k 180 21K 10fps LaSOT 279 685K Not specified TColor128 128 56K Not specified UAV123 123 113K 30fps NfS 100 383K 240fps VOT2019 106 20K Not specified TrackingNet 511 226K Not specified
> a“Not specified” indicates that the original dataset paper does not report a fixed frame rate, or that the videos are collected from the Internet or multiple sources and may therefore have different frame rates.

## 5. Results 

Here, we present a systematic experimental evaluation of the VOT task. In Section 5.1, we first introduce the datasets, evaluation metrics, baseline methods, and implementation details used in our evaluation. In Section 5.2, we compare HTNN with different models on nine benchmark datasets and various challenging conditions. We then analyze the impact of the temporal continuity of input videos and examine the effectiveness of the bias–variance complementarity. We further provide qualitative explanations for the tracking stability of HTNN in Section 5.3 and conduct ablation experiments in Section 5.4. Finally, Section 5.5 provides parameter sensitivity analysis to estimate how HTNN responds to changes in fusion parameters and CANN dynamical parameters. 

5.1. Experimental Setup 

Datasets. We evaluate HTNN on nine standard single-object tracking benchmarks, including OTB100 and OTB50 (Wu et al., 2015), GOT-10k (Huang et al., 2021), LaSOT (Fan et al., 2019), TColor128 (Liang et al., 2015), UAV123 (Mueller et al., 2016), NfS (Galoogahi et al., 2017), VOT2019 (Kristan et al., 2019), and TrackingNet (Müller et al., 2018). These datasets cover diverse tracking scenarios, including high-frame-rate tracking in NfS, regular-frame-rate tracking in OTB and UAV123, long-term tracking in LaSOT, diverse scenes in TrackingNet, and sparse-sampling tracking in GOT-10k. Detailed dataset statistics are shown in Table 1. 

Evaluation metrics. We primarily adopt two groups of standard evaluation metrics. The first group evaluates frame-level localization accuracy. Following common evaluation protocols (Huang et al., 2021), we use Precision (Pr ) defined as the proportion of frames in which the Euclidean distance between the predicted target center and the ground-truth target center is smaller than 20 pixels. We also use Success Rate (SR ) defined as the proportion of frames in which the intersection-over-union (IoU) between the predicted and ground-truth bounding boxes is greater than 0.5. Collectively, Pr and SR measure whether a tracker correctly localizes the target. The second group evaluates trajectory-level stability. We use Velocity Norm Error (VNE ) (Wang et al., 2025) to measure the consistency between the predicted motion magnitude and the ground-truth motion magnitude. Let 𝒙 ∗

> 𝑡

and ̂ 𝒙 𝑡 denote the ground-truth target center and the predicted target center at frame 𝑡 , respectively. We compute the ground-truth and predicted velocity magnitudes as 𝑣 𝑡 = ‖𝒙 ∗ 

> 𝑡

− 𝒙 ∗

> 𝑡 −1

‖2 and ̂𝑣 𝑡 = ‖̂𝒙 𝑡 −̂ 𝒙 𝑡 −1 ‖2, respectively. VNE is then defined as the average of |𝑣 𝑡 −̂𝑣 𝑡 | over the evaluated frames. A lower VNE indicates that the velocity magnitude of the predicted trajectory is closer to that of the ground-truth trajectory. 

Baseline methods. We compare HTNN with five related methods to separate the roles of different hybridization mechanisms. 1. ANN SiamFC serves as the data-driven ANN baseline. It directly estimates the current target state through Siamese appearance matching and does not include explicit continuous state evolution.                                                                                                                                                        

> Preprint Page 18 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking
> Table 2
> Overall comparison across nine benchmarks in terms of localization accuracy and tracking stability.
> Method aHTNN CANN DH FlyNet HSTNN ANN SiamFC CANN M
> Metric aPr ↑SR ↑VNE ↓Pr ↑SR ↑VNE ↓Pr ↑SR ↑VNE ↓Pr ↑SR ↑VNE ↓Pr ↑SR ↑VNE ↓Pr ↑SR ↑VNE ↓
> OTB50 75.1 68.7 2.58 38.8 32.7 5.18 17.7 8.3 5.29 71.6 64.4 3.66 71.3 66.2 2.72 16.4 9.6 6.11 OTB100 80.9 75.3 2.23 48.9 44.6 4.37 19.0 11.1 4.53 76.4 71.1 3.23 79.0 73.8 2.38 18.6 13.0 5.33 GOT-10k 35.8 59.4 12.54 23.1 50.2 15.00 6.1 19.8 15.49 31.4 57.7 16.02 35.9 61.6 14.07 6.7 23.8 18.00 LaSOT 32.0 35.4 6.71 20.2 26.2 6.06 5.7 6.5 5.98 29.4 33.7 9.79 31.0 35.2 7.66 6.4 8.2 6.33 TColor128 71.2 64.4 2.84 39.8 33.0 4.01 13.8 7.5 4.09 65.3 58.2 3.99 69.3 63.2 3.07 13.0 7.8 4.72 UAV123 70.1 61.7 2.27 36.7 35.1 2.67 9.3 4.6 2.83 68.0 59.9 2.85 68.2 59.9 2.64 5.4 3.4 2.99 NfS 64.8 65.5 2.81 38.7 42.7 2.84 5.5 4.0 2.98 58.9 61.9 4.20 63.7 65.1 3.25 3.9 3.4 3.17 VOT2019 64.1 43.4 6.54 25.8 20.5 8.97 8.2 5.7 8.82 56.6 39.6 6.79 60.9 41.4 6.74 10.3 5.8 9.61 TrackingNet b51.4 --47.7 --28.2 --49.7 --51.2 --28.2 --
> aFor Pr and SR, higher is better; for VNE, lower is better. Best results are shown in bold. bTrackingNet can only be evaluated online, with no SR or VNE returns.

2. CANN M serves as the motion-driven CANN baseline. It uses motion information as the external drive and obtains the final estimate entirely from CANN evolution, without using the ANN appearance response map. 3. CANN DH serves as the direct ANN–CANN hybridization baseline. It directly feeds the ANN response map into the CANN branch and decodes the final target state from the CANN response, without the representation-fusion and estimation-fusion stages used in HTNN. 4. FlyNet (Chancan et al., 2020) serves as a heuristic ANN-CANN hybridization baseline. Although the original model was designed for visual place recognition, we adapt it to VOT by only replacing the neural-network backbone while keeping the tracking pipeline unchanged for fair comparison. 5. HSTNN serves as a recent neuron-scale hybridization baseline. In this work, we adapt the Stage-1 hybridization of HSTNN (Wu et al., 2024) to VOT by inserting a lightweight RNN–SNN temporal response head after the SiamFC response map and before final peak decoding. We use the Stage-1 variant because it preserves the main response-refinement capacity of HSTNN, while the later selection and restoration stages mainly target neuron selection, compactness, and retraining of the hybrid model. 

Implementation details. HTNN is implemented in PyTorch and evaluated on a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU. For the data-driven components, ANN SiamFC , FlyNet, and HSTNN are trained on GOT-10k. For the training-free CANN branch, we selected the dynamical parameters and fusion weights by grid search on the LaSOT training set, using tracking accuracy and stability as the selection criteria. The selected parameters were then fixed for all benchmark evaluations without dataset-specific tuning. For CANN dynamics, we use an 𝑁 × 𝑁 toroidal grid with 𝑁 = 85 . The CANN response window contains 𝐿 = 8 discrete update steps with Δ𝑡 = 1 , corresponding to response time 𝑇 = 𝐿 Δ𝑡 .The dynamical parameters are set to 𝜏 𝑐 = 0 .71 , 𝐴 = 2 .01 , 𝑘 = 0 .08 , and 𝑎 = 0 .40 . For the two-stage fusion design, the weights are set to 𝜈 𝐴 = 0 .008 , 𝜈 𝑀 = 0 .47 , 𝜈 𝐴𝑀 = 1 .10 , and 𝜆 = 0 .92 . More implementation details are given in Appendix B. 

5.2. Main Results 

Overall performance. Table 2 reports the overall comparison across nine benchmarks and six methods. For localization accuracy, HTNN achieves the best Pr and SR on eight out of nine datasets, with GOT-10k being the only exception. In contrast, CANN DH , FlyNet, and HSTNN perform worse than ANN SiamFC in most cases. It indicates that direct ANN–CANN coupling, heuristic HNN adaptation, or inherently discrete neuronal-scale hybridization is insufficient for reliable target tracking. With theoretical guidance from functional synergy, HTNN achieves more accurate tracking. The stability results show a consistent tendency. Among the eight benchmarks with available ground-truth trajectories for offline VNE computation, HTNN obtains the best VNE on most datasets. On LaSOT, HTNN does not achieve the lowest VNE, but it still improves over ANN SiamFC while maintaining substantially stronger localization accuracy than  

> Preprint Page 19 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking

CANN M, CANN DH , and FlyNet. Since VNE measures the consistency between predicted and ground-truth velocity magnitudes, these results suggest that HTNN improves tracking stability without sacrificing localization accuracy in most evaluated settings. The result on GOT-10k should not be viewed as a simple exception. Admittedly, on this low-frame-rate benchmark (10 FPS), ANN SiamFC obtains higher Pr and SR. This result instead suggests an operating regime of HTNN, where CANN-based continuous dynamics may become less suitable when frame sampling is too sparse. We examine this boundary in Section 5.2, showing that a reduced frame rate and stronger sequence discontinuity weaken the advantage of CANN-based state evolution.  

> Figure 6: Condition-wise comparison on LaSOT, OTB50, TColor128, and UAV123. Each radar chart summarizes Pr, SR, or VNE across the standard challenging condition of the corresponding dataset. For visualization, each axis is normalized by the best method on that attribute with a log-scaled gap-to-best radius, so a larger radius always indicates better performance, while the number in parentheses reports the raw best score. Condition abbreviations: ARC, aspect ratio change; BC, background clutter; CM, camera motion; DEF, deformation; FM, fast motion; FOC, full occlusion; IPR, in-plane rotation; IV, illumination variation; LR, low resolution; MB, motion blur; OCC, occlusion; OPR, out-of-plane rotation; OV, out-of-view; POC, partial occlusion; ROT, rotation; SOB, similar object; SV, scale variation; VC, viewpoint change.

Condition-wise performance. Figure 6 examines HTNN under challenging tracking conditions. These conditions separate different sources of tracking difficulty, including appearance variation, target motion, occlusion, and background interference, thereby testing whether a method remains reliable across diverse tracking scenarios. Consistent with Table 2, HTNN maintains favorable Pr, SR, and VNE across most conditions. This indicates that its gains are broadly  

> Preprint Page 20 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking

distributed across diverse tracking challenges, supporting the role of ANN–CANN fusion in combining accurate localization with stable target-state evolution. 10 1 10 2  

> Video FPS
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> Pr
> FPS of GOT-10k
> NfS Dataset
> 10 010 1
> Video Discontinuity
> Mean Discontinuity of GOT-10k
> All Datasets
> HTNN
> ANN SiamFC
> CANN DH
> Figure 7: Controlled continuity-degradation analyses. Left: average Precision on NfS under temporal subsampling from 240 FPS to lower frame rates. Right: average Precision versus sequence discontinuity aggregated across datasets. The dashed vertical lines indicate the FPS and the mean discontinuity level corresponding to GOT-10k, respectively. Sequence discontinuity is evaluated by Velocity Smoothness Error (VSE) (Wang et al., 2025).

Temporal-continuity boundary analysis. The GOT-10k result raises the question of which cases HTNN could benefit from CANN-based state evolution. Figure 7 examines this through two degradation analyses. Both panels measure how the advantage of HTNN over ANN SiamFC changes as temporal continuity weakens. The left panel controls temporal continuity by reducing the sampling density of the same video source, while the right panel compares datasets with different motion discontinuity levels. For the cross-dataset analysis, sequence discontinuity is quantified by Velocity Smoothness Error (VSE) (Wang et al., 2025), which measures the average deviation between the ground-truth velocity magnitude sequence and its Savitzky–Golay-smoothed counterpart. A larger VSE indicates stronger high-frequency variation in target motion and therefore weaker local temporal continuity. In the NfS subsampling experiment, the performance gap between HTNN and ANN SiamFC narrows as the effective frame rate decreases. When the subsampled frame rate approaches the GOT-10k regime, the Pr advantage of HTNN disappears. The cross-dataset analysis shows the same tendency. As sequence discontinuity increases, the advantage of HTNN over ANN SiamFC becomes smaller, and no clear gain remains beyond the discontinuity level associated with GOT-10k. These observations characterize the operating regime of the proposed ANN–CANN hybridization. When adjacent frames preserve sufficient local continuity, CANN dynamics can capture target motion through finite-response state evolution. When frame sampling becomes sparse or adjacent-frame displacement becomes too large, the target may move beyond the effective range of local bump tracking. Under this condition, CANN evolution provides less benefit for localization and may introduce a stronger finite-response lag. The GOT-10k behavior is therefore consistent with the operating regime implied by the continuous-state dynamics of HTNN. It is also worth noting that GOT-10k represents an extremely low-frame-rate setting (10 FPS), which may be more discontinuous than common real-world applications operating at 30 FPS or higher. 

Drift analysis. We now turn to drift analysis to examine whether the performance gains of HTNN arise from the ANN–CANN complementarity predicted by the one-step analysis in Section 4.2 and the continuous-time analysis in Section 4.4. In full VOT trajectories, however, the corresponding bias and variance terms cannot be directly estimated under the standard tracking protocol. Only the first frame is initialized by ground truth, and each subsequent search region depends on previous predictions. Thus, in Figure 8 and Table 3, we analyze two tracking-failure patterns as empirical proxies that connect the theory with tracking behavior. Here, instantaneous drift refers to failures dominated by abrupt erroneous displacement,  

> Preprint Page 21 of 50

A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0       

> Threshold
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 120
> 140
> Failure Count
> Instantaneous Drift (Variance Dominant)
> HTNN
> ANN SiamFC
> CANN DH
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
> Threshold
> 350
> 400
> 450
> 500
> 550
> 600
> 650
> 700
> Failure Count
> Accumulative Drift (Bias Dominant)

Figure 8: Threshold-aggregated drift failure curves over all evaluated sequences. Left: instantaneous drift. Right: accumulative drift. The horizontal axis is the displacement-ratio threshold used for drift classification, and the vertical axis is the aggregated number of failures. 

Table 3 

Threshold-aggregated drift failure statistics over all evaluated sequences. 

Failure type Inst. Drift a↓ Acc. Drift b↓ Total Drift c↓

Method d ANN SiamFC HTNN CANN DH ANN SiamFC HTNN CANN DH ANN SiamFC HTNN CANN DH 

OTB50 7.75 3.75 0.20 14.25 15.25 35.80 22.0 19.0 36.0 OTB100 7.75 3.75 0.25 20.25 21.25 60.75 28.0 25.0 61.0 GOT-10k 4.30 4.35 1.00 32.70 34.65 47.00 37.0 39.0 48.0 LaSOT 41.35 29.55 1.20 186.65 193.45 242.80 228.0 223.0 244.0 TColor128 12.00 8.40 0.80 36.00 37.60 95.20 48.0 46.0 96.0 UAV123 7.65 3.40 0.75 52.35 52.60 98.25 60.0 56.0 99.0 NfS 9.00 3.00 0.00 38.00 43.00 76.00 47.0 46.0 76.0 VOT2019 5.15 4.50 0.35 33.85 30.50 57.65 39.0 35.0 58.0 All 94.95 60.70 4.55 414.05 428.30 713.45 509.0 489.0 718.0  

> a

Inst. Drift denotes instantaneous-drift failures. b Acc. Drift denotes accumulative-drift failures. c Total Drift is the sum of Inst. Drift and Acc. Drift. Each value is the average failure count over 20 displacement-ratio thresholds uniformly sampled from 0 to 3, which leads to non-integer entries. d The method columns are ordered as ANN SiamFC –HTNN– CANN DH to make the aggregate failure-count patterns easy to read: Inst. Drift follows ANN SiamFC > HTNN > CANN DH , Acc. Drift follows ANN SiamFC < HTNN < CANN DH , and Total Drift follows ANN SiamFC > HTNN < CANN DH .

such as jumps to remote distractors, and reflects sensitivity to instantaneous response-map fluctuations, or variance. Accumulative drift refers to failures in which the prediction gradually moves away from the target, for example, when the object moves too fast, and reflects sensitivity to finite-response lag or bias. For each sequence, we first identify the last stage of complete tracking failure, defined as the final frame of a period in which IoU remains below 0.1 for 30 consecutive frames. For the interval in which tracking degrades from success to failure, a failure is classified as instantaneous drift if, under a given threshold, the ratio between the predicted displacement and the ground-truth displacement exceeds the threshold, and this displacement causes a sharp IoU drop. Otherwise, the failure is classified as accumulative drift. 

Preprint Page 22 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

Figure 8 visualizes how the number of the two drift failures changes with the displacement-ratio threshold. For instantaneous drift, the curves consistently follow the ordering ANN SiamFC > HTNN > CANN DH . For accumulative drift, the ordering becomes ANN SiamFC < HTNN < CANN DH . This is consistent with the bias– variance complementarity expected from the theoretical analysis: ANN is more sensitive to instantaneous response-map fluctuations, whereas CANN is more sensitive to finite-response lag. Compared with ANN SiamFC , HTNN substantially reduces instantaneous-drift failures at the cost of introducing only a small amount of accumulative drift. Compared with CANN DR , HTNN substantially reduces accumulative-drift failures while introducing only a small amount of instantaneous drift. Thus, by exploiting the complementary error structures of the two branches, HTNN achieves stronger tracking performance. Table 3 reports the drift failure statistics across individual datasets and is broadly consistent with the above observations. This analysis completes the theory–experiment loop at the level of failure patterns. At the same time, the reduction of instantaneous-drift failures relative to ANN SiamFC further indicates that HTNN achieves more stable tracking. 

5.3. Visual Analytics 

The quantitative results above show that HTNN improves tracking stability and localization accuracy. We further examine this behavior through visual analytics of response maps and tracking trajectories. These visualizations are used to illustrate how HTNN behaves in concrete tracking sequences. Response Map Response Map  Video Frames Video Frames Frames #16 Frames #17 Frames #18 Frames #19 Frames #20 HTNN ANN  SiamFC Predicted Box Ground-truth Box Predicted Trajectory Ground-truth Trajectory Video Annotation Response Annotation  

> 0.0 1.0 0.5 Amplitude : Prediction : Groundtruth Search Region

Figure 9: Response-map visualization comparing HTNN with ANN SiamFC . Each column shows consecutive frames, response maps, predicted boxes, ground-truth boxes, and short predicted / ground-truth trajectories. ANN SiamFC exhibits an abrupt response shift in later frames, leading to instantaneous drift from the target. HTNN keeps the response more concentrated around the target-side region and maintains a more stable prediction across the same interval. 

Preprint Page 23 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

Visual analytics of response maps. Figure 9 illustrates a case where ANN SiamFC suffers from instantaneous drift. In the later frames, its response map shifts toward a distractor-side region, and the predicted box moves away from the ground-truth box. HTNN suppresses this remote response peak through CANN response-map dynamics, keeping the dominant response closer to the target-side region. The resulting prediction remains close to the ground-truth target, which visualizes the remote-peak suppression mechanism analyzed in Section 4.4. Response Map Response Map  Video Frames Video Frames Frames #66 Frames #67 Frames #68 Frames #69 Frames #70 HTNN CANN DH Predicted Box Ground-truth Box Predicted Trajectory Ground-truth Trajectory Video Annotation Response Annotation  

> 0.0 1.0 0.5 Amplitude : Prediction : Groundtruth Search Region

Figure 10: Response-map visualization comparing HTNN with CANN DH . Each column shows consecutive frames, response maps, predicted boxes, ground-truth boxes, and short predicted / ground-truth trajectories. CANN DH produces a smooth response but lags behind rapid target motion. HTNN follows the changing target state more promptly while preserving a concentrated response around the target. 

Figure 10 shows the opposite failure tendency of CANN DH . Its response remains smooth, but the predicted box lags behind the rapidly changing target state. HTNN responds more promptly to target motion and keeps the response map concentrated near the ground-truth location. This example indicates that the stability of HTNN is not obtained by excessive smoothing alone; it also depends on retaining current-frame ANN evidence through estimation-fusion. Together, these two examples show the two-sided role of HTNN in response-map evolution. Compared with 

ANN SiamFC , HTNN suppresses abrupt response-induced drift. Compared with CANN DH , HTNN avoids excessive lag when the target state changes rapidly. The response-map visualizations, therefore, provide qualitative support for the stable but not over-smoothed tracking behavior observed in the quantitative results. 

Visual analytics of tracking trajectories. Figure 11 visualizes tracking stability at the level of predicted trajectories. The first two columns compare HTNN with ANN SiamFC . In running-100-m , ANN SiamFC produces abrupt trajectory deviations, and its offsets become widely dispersed from the ground truth. HTNN keeps the predicted centers closer to the ground-truth trajectory and maintains a higher IoU in the highlighted interval. In uav3 , ANN SiamFC becomes 

Preprint Page 24 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 660 680 700 720 740 760 780                                            

> x
> 320
> 340
> 360
> 380
> 400
> 420
> 440
> y
> NfS (running-100-m)
> GT
> HTNN
> ANN SiamFC
> 280 300 320 340 360
> x
> 260
> 280
> 300
> 320
> 340
> UAV123 (uav3)
> GT
> HTNN
> ANN SiamFC
> 820 840 860 880 900 920 940
> x
> 80
> 100
> 120
> 140
> 160
> 180
> 200
> NfS (car-rc-rolling)
> GT
> HTNN
> CANN DH
> −30 −20 −10 010 20 30
> dx
> −50
> 0
> 50
> dy
> −20 −10 010 20
> dx
> −5
> 0
> 5
> −40 −20 020 40
> dx
> −20
> 0
> 20
> 460 470 480 490 500 510 520 530 540
> frame
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
> frame
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 200 210 220 230 240 250
> frame
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> Trajectory Offset from GT IoU

Figure 11: Visual analytics of tracking stability. Each column shows a representative sequence. The first two columns compare HTNN with ANN SiamFC , and the third column compares HTNN with CANN DH . The first row shows predicted center trajectories and the ground-truth trajectory. The second row shows offsets from the ground-truth center. The third row shows IoU curves over the selected frame interval. The yellow shaded region in the third row marks the frame interval where the stability difference between the compared methods becomes evident. In the first two sequences, HTNN improves stability by reducing abrupt deviations produced by ANN SiamFC . In the third sequence, HTNN maintains stability without the lagged response observed in CANN DH after a rapid target-state change. 

unstable in the later frames, which is accompanied by a sharp IoU decrease. HTNN keeps the prediction closer to the target and avoids this drift pattern. These examples show that HTNN improves tracking stability by suppressing abrupt deviations in the final prediction. The third column compares HTNN with CANN DH . In car-rc-rolling , CANN DH produces a smooth trajectory, but it lags behind the ground-truth trajectory after the target changes direction. HTNN shows local fluctuations, but it follows the target-state change more promptly and maintains better overlap. This example shows that stable tracking in HTNN is not equivalent to maximal smoothing. It is achieved by combining current-frame visual evidence with CANN-based state evolution, which helps suppress abrupt drift while avoiding the large lag observed in direct CANN-based estimation. 

5.4. Ablation Study 

Table 4 examines the contribution of the two fusion operations in HTNN. The reference setting is Direct Hybrid, where the ANN response map is directly used as the CANN input, and the final target state is decoded from the CANN response. This setting implements state-space alignment alone, without the two fusion operations introduced in HTNN. The other variants add representation-fusion, estimation-fusion, or both under the same tracking protocol. Representation-fusion improves the external drive before CANN evolution. Combining the ANN response with a motion cue and their interaction makes the CANN input more consistent with local inter-frame changes. This design is connected to the theoretical setting where the CANN drive is expected to be dominated by target-centered evidence 

Preprint Page 25 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

Table 4 

Ablation study of representation-fusion and estimation-fusion on eight benchmarks. 

Method Direct Hybrid a W/ Representation-fusion W/ Estimation-fusion Full HTNN Representation-fusion × ✓ × ✓

Estimation-fusion × × ✓ ✓

Metric b Pr ↑ SR ↑ Pr ↑ SR ↑ Pr ↑ SR ↑ Pr ↑ SR ↑

OTB50 38.8 32.7 +53.4% +67.0% +88.9% +108.0% +93.6% +110.1% 

OTB100 48.9 44.6 +34.8% +39.7% +63.8% +67.5% +65.4% +68.8% 

GOT-10k 23.1 50.2 +19.9% +11.2% +53.7% +20.9% +55.0% +18.3% LaSOT 20.2 26.2 +30.7% +21.4% +55.4% +34.4% +58.4% +35.1% 

TColor128 39.8 33.0 +42.2% +50.9% +77.1% +92.4% +78.9% +95.2% 

UAV123 36.7 35.1 +64.9% +55.3% +83.4% +68.1% +91.0% +75.8% 

NfS 38.7 42.7 +31.8% +25.5% +66.9% +53.2% +67.4% +53.4% 

VOT2019 25.8 20.5 +49.2% +45.4% +146.5% +127.3% +148.4% +111.7% Overall c 30.8 35.1 +39.4% +32.2% +74.6% +56.3% +77.3% +56.4%        

> aIn this table, Direct Hybrid denotes the CANN DH baseline introduced above. bThe Direct Hybrid columns report Pr and SR, and the remaining columns report relative changes with respect to Direct Hybrid. cThe Overall row is computed by first taking the video-number-weighted average of each model’s absolute performance across the eight datasets and then measuring the relative change against Direct Hybrid.

with bounded response fluctuations. Adding representation-fusion alone improves the overall Pr and SR by 39.4% and 32.2%, respectively, showing that shaping the CANN drive is already beneficial before changing the final decoding rule. Estimation-fusion produces a larger improvement. Instead of relying only on the CANN response after finite-time evolution, it combines the ANN and CANN response maps before arg max . This directly follows the additive-fusion analysis: the ANN response supplies current-frame visual evidence, while the CANN response supplies a temporally evolved state-space response. Adding estimation-fusion alone improves the overall Pr and SR by 74.6% and 56.3%, respectively, indicating that the main gain comes from using both aligned responses in the final estimation. The full HTNN achieves an overall improvement of 77.3% in Pr and 56.4% in SR over Direct Hybrid, exceeding all ablated variants in the overall average. The result shows that the two fusion operations serve different roles. Representation-fusion constructs a more suitable CANN drive, while estimation-fusion uses the complementary ANN and CANN responses for final decoding. Their combination supports the framework-level claim that systematic and synergistic ANN–CANN hybridization is necessary for effective tracking. 

5.5. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis 

Figure 12 examines the sensitivity of HTNN to fusion parameters and CANN dynamical parameters. A particularly informative trend appears in the estimation-fusion weight 𝜆 . The Precision curve shows a clear unimodal pattern, with its peak located near the ANN-dominant side rather than at either endpoint. This indicates that final localization should rely primarily on current-frame ANN evidence, while a nonzero CANN contribution is still needed to improve tracking stability. This empirical pattern is consistent with the MSE analysis in Section 4.3, where additive fusion admits an interior optimum under explicit dynamical-parameter conditions. In this sense, the 𝜆 sweep provides experimental support for the theoretical role of estimation-fusion. The remaining parameters show moderate variation across the tested ranges. The CANN dynamical parameters 𝜏 𝑐 ,

𝐴 , 𝑘 , and 𝑎 do not exhibit a sharp collapse under small perturbations, and the representation-fusion weights 𝜈 𝐴 , 𝜈 𝑀 ,and 𝜈 𝐴𝑀 also remain within a practical operating range. Although the theory gives a sufficient condition involving the bump width 𝑎 , this condition is derived under local leading-order assumptions and should be interpreted as a design guide rather than a necessary empirical boundary. Overall, the parameter study suggests that HTNN is not dependent on a fragile parameter choice; its performance is mainly shaped by the framework-level design of state-space alignment and two-stage fusion. 

Preprint Page 26 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking Value 

τ

A

k

a

vA

vM

vAM 

λ

Parameter 

> 0.76
> 0.77
> 0.78
> 0.79
> 0.80
> 0.81
> 0.82

Precision                                                 

> 0.55 0.65 0.75 0.85 0.95 1.05 1.15
> 1.4 1.6 1.8 22.2 2.4 2.6
> 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.1 0.11
> 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
> 0.03 0.05 0.06 0.08 0.09 0.11 0.12
> 0.16 0.31 0.47 0.62 0.78 0.94 1.09
> 0.94 1.09 1.25 1.40 1.56 1.71 1.87
> 0.75 0.8 0.84 0.87 0.9 0.94 0.99

Figure 12: Parameter sensitivity analysis of HTNN. Precision is evaluated by sweeping one parameter at a time while keeping the remaining parameters fixed at the default setting. The swept parameters include CANN dynamical parameters 

𝜏 𝑐 , 𝐴, 𝑘, 𝑎 , representation-fusion weights 𝜈 𝐴 , 𝜈 𝑀 , 𝜈 𝐴𝑀 , and the estimation-fusion weight 𝜆 . The 𝜆 curve exhibits a unimodal trend with a peak near the ANN-dominant side, while the other parameters show moderate sensitivity across the tested ranges. 

## 6. Discussion and Conclusions 

In this work, we present a theory-grounded ANN–CANN hybridization framework for continuous-state estimation, extending current HNNs from neuron-scale coupling toward a population-scale hybridization paradigm grounded in neural population dynamics. Through state-space alignment, the framework unifies heterogeneous ANN and CANN representations over a shared space, characterizes their bias–variance complementarity, and derives a fusion mechanism to realize the functional synergy. To instantiate this framework, we propose HTNN for VOT tasks. Systematic experiments on nine VOT benchmarks yield three core conclusions. First, this hybridization consistently improves localization accuracy and tracking stability compared to baseline methods across diverse, challenging tracking conditions. Second, drift analyses confirm that HTNN maintains stability by preventing abrupt jumps and controlling the accumulation of lag-induced errors as predicted in our theory. Third, temporal-continuity analysis characterizes the framework’s operating regime, showing that the benefits of CANN-based state evolution weaken when sparse frame sampling or discontinuous motion violates local continuity. As a proof-of-concept implementation of the population-scale hybridization framework, HTNN also points to several directions for further development. On the ANN side, we employ SiamFC as a lightweight testbed to validate the feasibility of the framework; adapting this architecture to more advanced AI models (such as SiamCAR Guo et al. (2020), TransT Chen et al. (2022), and SGLATrack Xue et al. (2025)) to achieve stronger tracking performance is a promising avenue for future work. On the CANN side, the present model uses a single two-dimensional attractor dynamics, whereas real tracking may require adaptive dynamical mechanisms across different spatial and temporal scales, and may further benefit from learnable components. At the framework level, the current analysis explains ANN–CANN hybridization through one-step estimation and local continuous-time dynamics. A more complete theory should model how response maps, CANN state evolution, and search-region updates interact throughout the full tracking 

Preprint Page 27 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

process. Such a theory would also support adaptive fusion, allowing the fusion weight and CANN response parameters to be adjusted according to confidence and temporal continuity. The experimental results highlight the potential of ANN–CANN hybridization for open-world tracking applications, where a tracker must accurately localize the target while avoiding unstable jumps under unknown environmental variations. The integration of CANN dynamics fulfills this requirement by mechanisms of suppressing remote response peaks and maintaining continuous state evolution. Overall, this unified framework provides a powerful algorithmic solution for stable target tracking in autonomous and embodied systems, paving the way for low-power, dependable perception when deployed on neuromorphic hardware.  

> Preprint Page 28 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking

## Appendix Contents 

A Proofs and Derivations for the ANN–CANN Hybridization Framework 29 

A.1 Derivations for Bias–Variance Complementarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 A.1.1 Local assumptions for the one-step analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 A.1.2 Bayes response under Gaussian heatmap supervision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 A.1.3 Proof of ANN asymptotic unbiasedness and covariance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 A.1.4 Proof of CANN finite-response bias and covariance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 A.1.5 Variance comparison and lower-variance condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 A.2 Derivations for Functional Synergy through Additive Fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 A.2.1 ANN–CANN cross covariance under shared response-map fluctuations . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 A.2.2 MSE of convex additive fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 A.2.3 Endpoint expansions and local improvement conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 A.2.4 Proof of convex additive fusion theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 A.3 Derivations for Continuous-Time Stable Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 A.3.1 Local continuous-time complementarity and synergy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 A.3.2 Spurious remote-peak suppression and continuous center evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 A.3.3 Estimation fusion before final decoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 

B Additional Implementation Details 45 

## A. Proofs and Derivations for the ANN–CANN Hybridization Framework 

This appendix provides the mathematical details for the theoretical analysis in Sections 4.2–4.4. Its organization follows the three theoretical components of the Method section: one-step bias–variance complementarity , functional synergy through convex additive fusion, and continuous-time stable tracking. The state-space alignment in Section 4.1 provides the shared target-state representation used throughout the analysis, while the HTNN model in Section 4.5 instantiates the resulting framework. Throughout the appendix, the notation is aligned with the main text. All asymptotic notation in this appendix is taken with respect to the effective sample size 𝑛 → ∞. For deterministic quantities, 𝑟 𝑛 = 𝑜 (𝑎 𝑛 ) means 𝑟 𝑛 ∕𝑎 𝑛 → 0.For random quantities, 𝑅 𝑛 = 𝑜 𝑝 (𝑎 𝑛 ) means 𝑅 𝑛 ∕𝑎 𝑛 converges to 0 in probability. Accordingly, expansions of random estimators use 𝑜 𝑝 (⋅), whereas deterministic statistical quantities obtained after taking expectations or covariances, such as bias, covariance, and MSE, use 𝑜 (⋅).

A.1. Derivations for Bias–Variance Complementarity 

This section provides the assumptions and derivations for the one-step bias–variance analysis in Section 4.2. We first specify the local statistical assumptions for the ANN response map and the local dynamical assumptions for the CANN activity bump. We then derive the Bayes response induced by Gaussian heatmap supervision, prove the ANN and CANN estimator expansions, and compare their leading-order variance terms. 

A.1.1. Local assumptions for the one-step analysis 

The assumptions below specify the local statistical and dynamical regime used in Section 4.2. They are not intended as a complete model of full-sequence tracking. Rather, they isolate the leading-order behavior of ANN–CANN hybridization in a single frame-to-frame state transition. 

Assumption (a) (Supervised heatmap and label noise) . Let 𝒙 ∗ ∈ ℝ2 denote the annotated target center for the current frame. Conditioned on the true target center 𝒙 1, the annotation noise is isotropic Gaussian: 

𝒙 ∗ ∣ 𝒙 1 ∼  (𝒙 1, 𝜎 2lab 𝐼 2), (A.1.1) 

where 𝐼 2 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix. The supervised heatmap centered at 𝒙 ∗ is 

𝑔 ℎ(𝒙 − 𝒙 ∗) = exp 

(

− ‖𝒙 − 𝒙 ∗‖2

2ℎ2

)

, (A.1.2)  

> Preprint Page 29 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking

where ℎ > 0 is the supervision width. In local coordinates, we write 𝒖 = 𝒙 − 𝒙 1 and 𝜻 = 𝒙 ∗ − 𝒙 1, where 𝜻 denotes the annotation noise. 

Assumption (b) (Local asymptotic regularity of the ANN response map) . Let 𝑆 (𝑛 ) 

> 𝐴

(𝒖 ) be the trained ANN response map around the current target state, where 𝑛 denotes the effective number of supervised training samples. There exists a deterministic Bayes response 𝑓 ⋆(𝒖 ) such that 

𝑆 (𝑛 ) 

> 𝐴

(𝒖 ) = 𝑓 ⋆(𝒖 ) + 𝛿 𝑛 (𝒖 ). (A.1.3) 

Here, 𝛿 𝑛 represents the finite-sample fluctuation of the learned response map around the Bayes response. Statistically, this corresponds to the local asymptotic regime in which a regular supervised estimator concentrates around its population target, while its residual fluctuation is of order 𝑛 −1∕2 . Specifically, on a local neighborhood  ⊂ ℝ2 of 

𝒖 = 𝟎 , we assume 

√𝑛 𝛿 𝑛 ⇒ 𝐺 in 𝐶 2(), (A.1.4) 

where 𝐺 is a zero-mean Gaussian random field. Here, 𝐶 2() denotes the space of twice continuously differentiable functions on , so this convergence controls the local asymptotic behavior of the response map and its first- and second-order derivatives. This assumption abstracts the standard central-limit-type behavior of smooth response estimators and is used only to characterize local fluctuations around the target-centered response. 

Assumption (c) (Local covariance model) . For closed-form covariance constants, the local covariance kernel of 𝐺 is modeled as an isotropic Gaussian kernel: 

𝐾 (𝒖 , 𝒗 ) ∶= Cov( 𝐺 (𝒖 ), 𝐺 (𝒗 )) = 𝜎 2 

> 𝐺

exp 

(

− ‖𝒖 − 𝒗 ‖2

2𝜉 2

)

, (A.1.5) 

where 𝜎 2 

> 𝐺

> 0 is the pointwise fluctuation variance and 𝜉 > 0 is the local correlation length. With a general covariance operator, the same arguments yield abstract covariance expressions; this local model gives the closed-form constants used in Section 4.2. 

Assumption (d) (CANN single-bump and translational-mode reduction) . The CANN branch operates in a local single-bump regime around 𝒙 1. For the one-step transition 𝒙 1 = 𝒙 0 + 𝚫 , the frame-to-frame displacement is assumed to be small relative to the CANN bump width: 

‖𝚫 ‖

𝑎 = 𝑜 (1) . (A.1.6) 

Equivalently, in a finite local regime, one may read this condition as ‖𝚫 ‖ ≤ 𝜀 Δ𝑎 for a small constant 0 < 𝜀 Δ ≪ 1. This condition keeps the previous and current target states within the same local bump neighborhood, so that the bump centered near 𝒙 0 can be approximated as translating toward 𝒙 1 through the translational modes. Large frame-to-frame jumps comparable to or larger than the bump width are outside this local one-step analysis. Its stationary synaptic-input bump prototype is ̃𝑈 (𝒖 ) = 𝑈 0 exp 

(

− ‖𝒖 ‖2

4𝑎 2

)

, (A.1.7) 

where 𝑈 0 > 0 is the bump amplitude and 𝑎 > 0 is the bump width. Writing 𝒖 = ( 𝑢 1, 𝑢 2)⊤, the two normalized translational modes are 

𝑟 𝑖 (𝒖 ) = 𝑢 𝑖 

√2𝜋𝑎 2

exp 

(

− ‖𝒖 ‖2

4𝑎 2

)

, 𝑖 ∈ {1 , 2} , (A.1.8) 

with the standard 𝐿 2(ℝ2) inner product 

⟨𝜙, 𝜓 ⟩ = ∫ℝ2

𝜙 (𝒖 )𝜓 (𝒖 ) d 𝒖 . (A.1.9)  

> Preprint Page 30 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking

Define 

𝑎 𝑖,𝑛 ∶= ⟨𝛿 𝑛 , 𝑟 𝑖 ⟩, 𝒂 𝑛 = ( 𝑎 1,𝑛 , 𝑎 2,𝑛 )⊤. (A.1.10) 

Within the weak-stimulus, small-distortion, and finite-response regime, the CANN center dynamics is dominated by these two translational modes. The non-translational deformation modes contribute only higher-order corrections to the center equation over the response window [0 , 𝑇 ]. This reduction follows the standard perturbation picture of 2D CANNs, where the translational modes are neutral and the remaining distortion modes decay under recurrent dynamics (Fung et al., 2010, 2009). 

A.1.2. Bayes response under Gaussian heatmap supervision 

This section derives the deterministic Bayes response 𝑓 ⋆ used in the ANN estimator analysis. 

Derivation of the Bayes response. Under squared-loss heatmap supervision, the Bayes response is the conditional expectation of the supervised heatmap: 

𝑓 ⋆(𝒙 ) = 𝔼 [𝑔 ℎ(𝒙 − 𝒙 ∗) ∣ 𝒙 1

] . (A.1.11) Using the local coordinate 𝒖 = 𝒙 − 𝒙 1 and the annotation noise 𝜻 = 𝒙 ∗ − 𝒙 1, Assumption (a) gives 𝜻 ∼  (𝟎 , 𝜎 2lab 𝐼 2).Hence 

𝑓 ⋆(𝒖 ) = ∫ℝ2

exp 

(

− ‖𝒖 − 𝜻 ‖2

2ℎ2

) 12𝜋𝜎 2lab 

exp 

(

− ‖𝜻 ‖2

2𝜎 2lab 

)

d𝜻 . (A.1.12) This integral is the convolution of an unnormalized isotropic Gaussian with a normalized isotropic Gaussian density. Completing the square gives 

𝑓 ⋆(𝒖 ) = 𝑀 exp 

(

− ‖𝒖 ‖2

2𝜌 2

)

, 𝜌 2 = ℎ2 + 𝜎 2lab , 𝑀 = ℎ2

ℎ2 + 𝜎 2lab 

. (A.1.13) The amplitude 𝑀 appears because 𝑔 ℎ has unit peak and is not probability-density normalized. The gradient and Hessian at the peak are 

∇𝑓 ⋆(𝟎 ) = 𝟎 , ∇2𝑓 ⋆(𝟎 ) = − 𝑀 𝜌 2 𝐼 2. (A.1.14) Thus 𝒖 = 𝟎 is a strict local maximizer of 𝑓 ⋆, and the local curvature of the Bayes response is controlled by 𝑀 ∕𝜌 2.

A.1.3. Proof of ANN asymptotic unbiasedness and covariance 

Proof of Proposition 1. Let ̂ 𝒖 𝐴 be the local maximizer of 

𝑆 (𝑛 ) 

> 𝐴

(𝒖 ) = 𝑓 ⋆(𝒖 ) + 𝛿 𝑛 (𝒖 ) (A.1.15) near 𝒖 = 𝟎 . By Appendix A.1.2, 

∇2𝑓 ⋆(𝟎 ) = − 𝑀 𝜌 2 𝐼 2, (A.1.16) which is strictly negative definite. Together with the 𝐶 2() convergence in Assumption (b), this implies that, with probability tending to one, 𝑆 (𝑛 ) 

> 𝐴

has a unique local maximizer in a sufficiently small neighborhood of 𝒖 = 𝟎 .The first-order optimality condition is 

∇𝑆 (𝑛 ) 

> 𝐴

(̂ 𝒖 𝐴 ) = 𝟎 . (A.1.17) Expanding around 𝒖 = 𝟎 gives 

𝟎 = ∇ 𝑓 ⋆(𝟎 ) + ∇ 2𝑓 ⋆(𝟎 )̂ 𝒖 𝐴 + ∇ 𝛿 𝑛 (𝟎 ) + 𝑜 𝑝 (𝑛 −1∕2 ). (A.1.18)  

> Preprint Page 31 of 50

A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

Since ∇𝑓 ⋆(𝟎 ) = 𝟎 and ∇2𝑓 ⋆(𝟎 ) = −( 𝑀 ∕𝜌 2)𝐼 2, we obtain ̂

𝒖 𝐴 = 𝜌 2

𝑀 ∇𝛿 𝑛 (𝟎 ) + 𝑜 𝑝 (𝑛 −1∕2 ). (A.1.19) Therefore, ̂

𝒙 𝐴 = 𝒙 1 + 𝜌 2

𝑀 ∇𝛿 𝑛 (𝟎 ) + 𝑜 𝑝 (𝑛 −1∕2 ). (A.1.20) Because √𝑛 𝛿 𝑛 ⇒ 𝐺 in 𝐶 2(), we have 

√𝑛 ∇𝛿 𝑛 (𝟎 ) ⇒ ∇𝐺 (𝟎 ). (A.1.21) The field 𝐺 is zero mean, so the leading term of ̂ 𝒙 𝐴 − 𝒙 1 has zero mean. Hence 

Bias 𝐴 = 𝔼 [̂𝒙 𝐴 − 𝒙 1] = 𝑜 (𝑛 −1∕2 ). (A.1.22) It remains to compute the covariance. By Assumption (c), 

𝐾 (𝒖 , 𝒗 ) = Cov( 𝐺 (𝒖 ), 𝐺 (𝒗 )) = 𝜎 2 

> 𝐺

exp 

(

− ‖𝒖 − 𝒗 ‖2

2𝜉 2

)

. (A.1.23) For 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ {1 , 2} , the (𝑖, 𝑗 )-th entry of the gradient covariance is 

[ Cov(∇ 𝐺 (𝟎 )) ] 

> 𝑖𝑗

= Cov( 𝜕 𝑖 𝐺 (𝟎 ), 𝜕 𝑗 𝐺 (𝟎 )) = 𝜕 𝑢 𝑖 𝜕 𝑣 𝑗 𝐾 (𝒖 , 𝒗 )|||𝒖 =𝒗 =𝟎 . (A.1.24) Writing 𝒘 = 𝒖 − 𝒗 , we have 

𝜕 𝑢 𝑖 𝜕 𝑣 𝑗 𝐾 (𝒖 , 𝒗 ) = − 𝜕 𝑤 𝑖 𝜕 𝑤 𝑗 

[

𝜎 2 

> 𝐺

exp 

(

− ‖𝒘 ‖2

2𝜉 2

)] 

. (A.1.25) Evaluating at 𝒘 = 𝟎 gives 

Cov( 𝜕 𝑖 𝐺 (𝟎 ), 𝜕 𝑗 𝐺 (𝟎 )) = 𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝜉 2 𝛿 𝑖𝑗 . (A.1.26) Therefore, 

Cov(∇ 𝛿 𝑛 (𝟎 )) = 𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝑛𝜉 2 𝐼 2 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (A.1.27) Substituting the local maximizer expansion gives 

Σ𝐴 ∶= Cov( ̂𝒙 𝐴 ∣ 𝒙 1) = 𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝑛 𝜌 4

𝑀 2𝜉 2 𝐼 2 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (A.1.28) Taking the trace gives 

𝑠 𝐴 ∶= tr(Σ 𝐴 ) = 2𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝜌 4

𝑛𝑀 2𝜉 2 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (A.1.29) This proves Proposition 1. 

Preprint Page 32 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

A.1.4. Proof of CANN finite-response bias and covariance 

Proof of Proposition 2. Let 𝒚 (𝑡 ) ∈ ℝ2 denote the displacement of the CANN bump center relative to the current target state 𝒙 1. At the beginning of the response window, the bump is centered at the previous state, so 

𝒚 (0) = 𝒙 0 − 𝒙 1 = − 𝚫 . (A.1.30) The CANN external drive is the ANN response map in the aligned formulation: 

𝐼 ext (𝒖 , 𝑡 ) = 𝑓 ⋆(𝒖 ) + 𝛿 𝑛 (𝒖 ). (A.1.31) Under the single-bump approximation, the CANN synaptic input is written as 

𝑈 (𝒖 , 𝑡 ) = ̃ 𝑈 (𝒖 − 𝒚 (𝑡 )) + 𝑅 ⟂(𝒖 , 𝑡 ), (A.1.32) where 𝑅 ⟂ denotes the stable non-translational deformation component. Projecting the CANN dynamics onto the shifted translational modes gives ̇𝑦 𝑖 (𝑡 ) = 𝛾 dyn ⟨𝐼 ext (⋅, 𝑡 ), 𝑟 𝑖 (⋅ − 𝒚 (𝑡 )) ⟩ + 𝑜 (‖𝒚 (𝑡 )‖) + 𝑜 𝑝 (𝑛 −1∕2 ), 𝑖 ∈ {1 , 2} , (A.1.33) where 

𝛾 dyn =

√2∕ 𝜋 𝜏 𝑐 𝑈 0

. (A.1.34) This coefficient follows from 

𝜕 𝑢 𝑖 ̃ 𝑈 (𝒖 ) = − 𝑢 𝑖 

2𝑎 2 𝑈 0 exp 

(

− ‖𝒖 ‖2

4𝑎 2

)

= − 𝑈 0

√ 𝜋 

2 𝑟 𝑖 (𝒖 ), (A.1.35) which converts the external-drive projection onto 𝑟 𝑖 into a center-velocity term. We first compute the deterministic contribution of 𝑓 ⋆. For 𝑖 = 1 , using 

𝑟 1(𝒖 ) = 𝑢 1

√2𝜋𝑎 2

exp 

(

− ‖𝒖 ‖2

4𝑎 2

)

, (A.1.36) we have 

⟨𝑓 ⋆, 𝑟 1(⋅ − 𝒚 )⟩ = 𝑀 

√2𝜋𝑎 2 ∫ℝ2

(𝑢 1 − 𝑦 1) exp 

(

− ‖𝒖 ‖2

2𝜌 2 − ‖𝒖 − 𝒚 ‖2

4𝑎 2

)

d𝒖 . (A.1.37) Expanding this Gaussian integral to first order in 𝒚 gives 

⟨𝑓 ⋆, 𝑟 1(⋅ − 𝒚 )⟩ = − 8𝑀𝑎 2𝜌 2

√2∕ 𝜋 (𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2 𝑦 1 + 𝑂 (‖𝒚 ‖2). (A.1.38) The same calculation holds for 𝑖 = 2 . Multiplying by 𝛾 dyn , the deterministic restoring coefficient is 

𝛽 = 𝛾 dyn 

8𝑀𝑎 2𝜌 2

√2∕ 𝜋 (𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2 = 8𝑀𝑎 2𝜌 2

𝜏 𝑐 𝑈 0(𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2 . (A.1.39) For the fluctuation term, Assumption (d) gives 

⟨𝛿 𝑛 , 𝑟 𝑖 (⋅ − 𝒚 (𝑡 )) ⟩ = 𝑎 𝑖,𝑛 + 𝑜 𝑝 (𝑛 −1∕2 ) (A.1.40) in the local tracking regime. Thus, after first-order local linearization, the CANN center dynamics is ̇𝑦 𝑖 (𝑡 ) = − 𝛽𝑦 𝑖 (𝑡 ) + 𝛾 dyn 𝑎 𝑖,𝑛 + 𝑜 𝑝 (𝑛 −1∕2 ), 𝑖 ∈ {1 , 2} . (A.1.41)  

> Preprint Page 33 of 50

A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

Solving this linear equation on [0 , 𝑇 ], and writing 

𝛼 = 𝑒 −𝛽𝑇 , (A.1.42) yields 

𝒚 (𝑇 ) = − 𝛼 𝚫 + 1 − 𝛼 𝛽 𝛾 dyn 𝒂 𝑛 + 𝑜 𝑝 (𝑛 −1∕2 ). (A.1.43) Since ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 = 𝒙 1 + 𝒚 (𝑇 ), we obtain ̂

𝒙 𝐶 = 𝒙 1 − 𝛼 𝚫 + 1 − 𝛼 𝛽 𝛾 dyn 𝒂 𝑛 + 𝑜 𝑝 (𝑛 −1∕2 ). (A.1.44) Because the leading finite-sample fluctuation is zero mean, 𝔼 [𝒂 𝑛 ] = 𝟎 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1∕2 ). Taking expectations in Eq. (A.1.44) gives 

Bias 𝐶 = 𝔼 [̂𝒙 𝐶 − 𝒙 1] = − 𝛼 𝚫 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1∕2 ). (A.1.45) We now compute the covariance of 𝒂 𝑛 . From Assumption (c), for 𝑎 1,𝑛 = ⟨𝛿 𝑛 , 𝑟 1⟩,

Var( 𝑎 1,𝑛 ) = 1

𝑛 ∫ℝ2 ∫ℝ2

𝑟 1(𝒖 )𝐾 (𝒖 , 𝒗 )𝑟 1(𝒗 ) d 𝒖 d𝒗 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (A.1.46) The same expression holds for 𝑎 2,𝑛 , and the cross term vanishes by symmetry. Using the Fourier convention ̂𝜙 (𝒌 ) = ∫ℝ2

𝑒 −𝑖 𝒌 ⊤𝒖 𝜙 (𝒖 ) d 𝒖 , (A.1.47) whose inverse transform contains the factor (2 𝜋 )−2 , we have ̂𝐾 (𝒌 ) = 2 𝜋𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝜉 2 exp 

(

− 𝜉 2‖𝒌 ‖2

2

)

, (A.1.48) and ̂𝑟 1(𝒌 ) = − 𝑖 4

√

2𝜋𝑎 2𝑘 1 exp(− 𝑎 2‖𝒌 ‖2). (A.1.49) Therefore, 

∫ ∫ 𝑟 1(𝒖 )𝐾 (𝒖 , 𝒗 )𝑟 1(𝒗 ) d 𝒖 d𝒗 = 1(2 𝜋 )2 ∫ℝ2

|̂𝑟 1(𝒌 )|2̂ 𝐾 (𝒌 ) d 𝒌 . (A.1.50) Substituting the two Fourier transforms and using 

∫ℝ2

𝑘 21𝑒 −𝐵 ‖𝒌 ‖2

d𝒌 = 𝜋 

2𝐵 2 , 𝐵 = 2 𝑎 2 + 𝜉 2

2 , (A.1.51) gives 

Var( 𝑎 1,𝑛 ) = 𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝑛 

32 𝜋𝑎 4𝜉 2

(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2)2 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (A.1.52) Thus, 

Cov( 𝒂 𝑛 ) = 𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝑛 𝐽 (𝑎, 𝜉 )𝐼 2 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ), 𝐽 (𝑎, 𝜉 ) = 32 𝜋𝑎 4𝜉 2

(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2)2 . (A.1.53) 

Preprint Page 34 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

From Eq. (A.1.44), ̂

𝒙 𝐶 − 𝔼 ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 = 1 − 𝛼 𝛽 𝛾 dyn 𝒂 𝑛 + 𝑜 𝑝 (𝑛 −1∕2 ). (A.1.54) Using Eq. (A.1.53), we obtain 

Σ𝐶 ∶= Cov( ̂𝒙 𝐶 ∣ 𝚫 ) = 

( 1 − 𝛼 𝛽 𝛾 dyn 

)2 𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝑛 𝐽 (𝑎, 𝜉 )𝐼 2 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (A.1.55) Since 

𝛾 dyn 

𝛽 =

√2∕ 𝜋 (𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2

8𝑀𝑎 2𝜌 2 , (A.1.56) we get 

Σ𝐶 = 𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝑛 (1 − 𝛼 )2 𝜉 2(𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)4

𝑀 2𝜌 4(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2)2 𝐼 2 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (A.1.57) Taking the trace gives 

𝑠 𝐶 ∶= tr(Σ 𝐶 ) = 2𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝑛 (1 − 𝛼 )2 𝜉 2(𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)4

𝑀 2𝜌 4(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2)2 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (A.1.58) This proves Proposition 2. 

A.1.5. Variance comparison and lower-variance condition 

Derivation of the variance comparison. From Eq. (16) and Eq. (20), the leading covariance ratio is 

Σ𝐶 

Σ𝐴 

= (1 − 𝛼 )2 𝜉 4(𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)4

𝜌 8(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2)2 + 𝑜 (1) . (A.1.59) Equivalently, 

Σ𝐶 =̄𝜅 2Σ𝐴 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ),̄ 𝜅 = (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝜉 2(𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2

𝜌 4(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2) . (A.1.60) The same relation holds after taking traces: 

𝑠 𝐶 =̄𝜅 2𝑠 𝐴 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (A.1.61) Thus, ̄𝜅 < 1 means that the CANN branch has a smaller leading-order variance than the ANN branch. Since 1 − 𝛼 ≤ 1, a sufficient condition independent of the response time is 

𝜉 2(𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2

𝜌 4(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2) < 1. (A.1.62) Let 𝑡 = 𝑎 2. After expanding and canceling common terms, this inequality becomes 

𝜉 2𝑡 < 𝜌 2(𝜌 2 − 𝜉 2). (A.1.63) Therefore, when 𝜌 2 > 𝜉 2, choosing 

𝑎 2 < 𝜌 2(𝜌 2 − 𝜉 2)

𝜉 2 (A.1.64) is sufficient for ̄𝜅 < 1. This proves the lower-variance condition used in Section 4.2. 

Preprint Page 35 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

A.2. Derivations for Functional Synergy through Additive Fusion 

This section provides the derivations for Section 4.3. The goal is to justify how convex additive fusion uses the bias–variance complementarity established in Section 4.2 to reduce the leading-order MSE. We first derive the ANN–CANN cross covariance induced by the shared response-map fluctuation. We then derive the MSE of the convex additive estimator, the endpoint expansions, and the convex-fusion theorem. 

A.2.1. ANN–CANN cross covariance under shared response-map fluctuations 

Derivation of the ANN–CANN cross covariance. Define the centered stochastic errors of the ANN and CANN estimators as ̃

𝒆 𝐴 ∶= ̂ 𝒙 𝐴 − 𝔼 [̂ 𝒙 𝐴 ],̃ 𝒆 𝐶 ∶= ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 − 𝔼 [̂ 𝒙 𝐶 ]. (A.2.1) Following the notation in Section 4.3, define 

Σ𝐴𝐶 ∶= 𝔼 [̃𝒆 𝐴 ̃ 𝒆 ⊤𝐶 ], 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 ∶= tr(Σ 𝐴𝐶 ). (A.2.2) From Proposition 1, the leading ANN fluctuation is ̃

𝒆 𝐴 = 𝜌 2

𝑀 ∇𝛿 𝑛 (𝟎 ) + 𝑜 𝑝 (𝑛 −1∕2 ). (A.2.3) From Proposition 2, the centered CANN fluctuation is ̃

𝒆 𝐶 = 1 − 𝛼 𝛽 𝛾 dyn 𝒂 𝑛 + 𝑜 𝑝 (𝑛 −1∕2 ). (A.2.4) Thus the leading cross covariance is determined by Cov( 𝜕 𝑖 𝛿 𝑛 (𝟎 ), 𝑎 𝑖,𝑛 ), or equivalently by Cov( 𝜕 𝑖 𝐺 (𝟎 ), ⟨𝐺, 𝑟 𝑖 ⟩) at the Gaussian-field limit. For 𝑖 = 1 , using the covariance kernel 𝐾 (𝒖 , 𝒗 ) = Cov( 𝐺 (𝒖 ), 𝐺 (𝒗 )) , we have 

Cov( 𝜕 1𝐺 (𝟎 ), ⟨𝐺, 𝑟 1⟩) = ∫ℝ2

𝜕 𝑢 1 𝐾 (𝒖 , 𝒗 )|||𝒖 =𝟎 𝑟 1(𝒗 ) d 𝒗 . (A.2.5) Under Assumption (c), 

𝐾 (𝒖 , 𝒗 ) = 𝜎 2 

> 𝐺

exp 

(

− ‖𝒖 − 𝒗 ‖2

2𝜉 2

)

, (A.2.6) and therefore 

𝜕 𝑢 1 𝐾 (𝒖 , 𝒗 )|||𝒖 =𝟎 = 𝑣 1𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝜉 2 exp 

(

− ‖𝒗 ‖2

2𝜉 2

)

. (A.2.7) Using 

𝑟 1(𝒗 ) = 𝑣 1

√2𝜋𝑎 2

exp 

(

− ‖𝒗 ‖2

4𝑎 2

)

, (A.2.8) direct Gaussian integration gives 

Cov( 𝜕 1𝐺 (𝟎 ), ⟨𝐺, 𝑟 1⟩) = 4√2𝜋𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝑎 2𝜉 2

(𝜉 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2 . (A.2.9) The same expression holds for 𝑖 = 2 , and the off-diagonal terms vanish by symmetry. Substituting the leading ANN and CANN fluctuations gives the per-coordinate cross covariance 

Cov( ̃𝑒 𝐴,𝑖 ,̃𝑒 𝐶,𝑖 ) = 𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝑛 (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝜉 2(𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2

𝑀 2(𝜉 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ), 𝑖 ∈ {1 , 2} . (A.2.10)  

> Preprint Page 36 of 50

A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

Hence 

𝑠 𝐴𝐶 = tr(Σ 𝐴𝐶 ) = 2𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝑛 (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝜉 2(𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2

𝑀 2(𝜉 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (A.2.11) Using 

𝑠 𝐴 = 2𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝑛 𝜌 4

𝑀 2𝜉 2 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ), (A.2.12) and 

𝑠 𝐶 = 2𝜎 2

> 𝐺

𝑛 (1 − 𝛼 )2 𝜉 2(𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)4

𝑀 2𝜌 4(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2)2 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ), (A.2.13) we obtain 

𝑠 𝐴𝐶 = 𝜒 𝐴𝐶 

√𝑠 𝐴 𝑠 𝐶 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ), 𝜒 𝐴𝐶 = 𝜉 2(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2)(𝜉 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2 . (A.2.14) Moreover, 𝜒 𝐴𝐶 ∈ (0 , 1) , because 

(𝜉 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2 − 𝜉 2(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2) = 4 𝑎 4 > 0. (A.2.15) Thus, the two estimators share the same finite-sample response-map fluctuation source, but the translational-mode projection keeps their leading cross covariance below full scalar correlation. 

A.2.2. MSE of convex additive fusion 

Derivation of Eq. (26) . Let 

𝒆 𝐴 ∶= ̂ 𝒙 𝐴 − 𝒙 1, 𝒆 𝐶 ∶= ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 − 𝒙 1. (A.2.16) From Propositions 1 and 2, 

𝔼 [𝒆 𝐴 ] = 𝑜 (𝑛 −1∕2 ), 𝔼 [𝒆 𝐶 ] = − 𝛼 𝚫 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1∕2 ). (A.2.17) The convex additive estimator is ̂

𝒙 𝐻 (𝜆 ) = 𝜆̂ 𝒙 𝐴 + (1 − 𝜆 )̂𝒙 𝐶 , 𝜆 ∈ [0 , 1] , (A.2.18) and its error is 

𝒆 𝐻 (𝜆 ) ∶= ̂ 𝒙 𝐻 (𝜆 ) − 𝒙 1 = 𝜆 𝒆 𝐴 + (1 − 𝜆 )𝒆 𝐶 . (A.2.19) Thus the leading bias is 

Bias 𝐻 (𝜆 ) = 𝔼 [𝒆 𝐻 (𝜆 )] = −(1 − 𝜆 )𝛼 𝚫 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1∕2 ). (A.2.20) Since 𝑑 = ‖𝚫 ‖2, the squared bias term is 

‖ Bias 𝐻 (𝜆 )‖2 = (1 − 𝜆 )2𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (A.2.21) For the covariance term, write 

𝑠 𝐴 ∶= tr(Σ 𝐴 ), 𝑠 𝐶 ∶= tr(Σ 𝐶 ), 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 ∶= tr(Σ 𝐴𝐶 ). (A.2.22) Using the centered errors ̃ 𝒆 𝐴 and ̃ 𝒆 𝐶 , the centered hybrid error is ̃

𝒆 𝐻 (𝜆 ) = 𝜆̃ 𝒆 𝐴 + (1 − 𝜆 )̃𝒆 𝐶 . (A.2.23) Therefore, 

tr (Cov( 𝒆 𝐻 (𝜆 )) ) = 𝜆 2𝑠 𝐴 + (1 − 𝜆 )2𝑠 𝐶 + 2 𝜆 (1 − 𝜆 )𝑠 𝐴𝐶 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ). (A.2.24) Adding the squared bias and covariance trace gives 

MSE 𝐻 (𝜆 ) = (1 − 𝜆 )2𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝜆 2𝑠 𝐴 + (1 − 𝜆 )2𝑠 𝐶 + 2 𝜆 (1 − 𝜆 )𝑠 𝐴𝐶 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ), (A.2.25) which is Eq. (26). 

Preprint Page 37 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

A.2.3. Endpoint expansions and local improvement conditions 

Derivation of the endpoint expansions. Let 𝐿 𝐻 (𝜆 ) denote the leading quadratic part of MSE 𝐻 (𝜆 ):

𝐿 𝐻 (𝜆 ) = (1 − 𝜆 )2𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝜆 2𝑠 𝐴 + (1 − 𝜆 )2𝑠 𝐶 + 2 𝜆 (1 − 𝜆 )𝑠 𝐴𝐶 . (A.2.26) Near the ANN endpoint, set 𝜆 = 1 − 𝜖 with 0 < 𝜖 ≪ 1. Then 

𝐿 𝐻 (1 − 𝜖 ) − 𝐿 𝐻 (1) = 𝜖 2𝛼 2𝑑 + (1 − 𝜖 )2𝑠 𝐴 + 𝜖 2𝑠 𝐶 + 2(1 − 𝜖 )𝜖𝑠 𝐴𝐶 − 𝑠 𝐴 

= −2 𝜖 (𝑠 𝐴 − 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 ) + 𝑂 (𝜖 2). (A.2.27) Thus, adding a small CANN contribution improves the ANN endpoint when 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐴 . Under the lower-variance condition ̄𝜅 < 1 , we have 𝑠 𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐴 . Together with Eq. (A.2.14) and 𝜒 𝐴𝐶 ∈ (0 , 1) , this gives 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐴 at leading order. Near the CANN endpoint, set 𝜆 = 𝜖 with 0 < 𝜖 ≪ 1. Then 

𝐿 𝐻 (𝜖 ) − 𝐿 𝐻 (0) = (1 − 𝜖 )2𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝜖 2𝑠 𝐴 + (1 − 𝜖 )2𝑠 𝐶 + 2 𝜖 (1 − 𝜖 )𝑠 𝐴𝐶 − ( 𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝑠 𝐶 )= −2 𝜖 (𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝑠 𝐶 − 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 ) + 𝑂 (𝜖 2). (A.2.28) A sufficient condition for local improvement at the CANN endpoint, independent of the motion magnitude 𝑑 , is 

𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐶 . (A.2.29) Using 𝑠 𝐶 =̄𝜅 2𝑠 𝐴 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ) and Eq. (A.2.14), the leading-order condition 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐶 is equivalent to 

𝜒 𝐴𝐶 <̄𝜅. (A.2.30) Substituting 

𝜒 𝐴𝐶 = 𝜉 2(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2)(𝜉 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2 ,̄ 𝜅 = (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝜉 2(𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2

𝜌 4(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2) , (A.2.31) gives 

𝜉 2(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2)(𝜉 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2 < (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝜉 2(𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2

𝜌 4(𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2) . (A.2.32) After canceling the common positive factor 𝜉 2 and taking square roots, this becomes 

𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2

𝜉 2 + 2 𝑎 2 <

√

1 − 𝛼 𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2

𝜌 2 , (A.2.33) which is Eq. (29). 

A.2.4. Proof of convex additive fusion theorem 

Proof of Theorem 1. The leading quadratic part of the MSE is 

𝐿 𝐻 (𝜆 ) = (1 − 𝜆 )2𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝜆 2𝑠 𝐴 + (1 − 𝜆 )2𝑠 𝐶 + 2 𝜆 (1 − 𝜆 )𝑠 𝐴𝐶 . (A.2.34) Expanding it as a quadratic function of 𝜆 gives 

𝐿 𝐻 (𝜆 ) = 𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝑠 𝐶 + 2( 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 − 𝛼 2𝑑 − 𝑠 𝐶 )𝜆 + 𝑄 𝐻 𝜆 2, (A.2.35) where 

𝑄 𝐻 = 𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝑠 𝐴 + 𝑠 𝐶 − 2 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 . (A.2.36) Under the conditions 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐴 and 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐶 , we have 

𝑄 𝐻 = ( 𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝑠 𝐶 − 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 ) + ( 𝑠 𝐴 − 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 ) > 0. (A.2.37) 

Preprint Page 38 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

Thus 𝐿 𝐻 (𝜆 ) is strictly convex, and its unconstrained minimizer is obtained from 𝜕𝐿 𝐻 (𝜆 )∕ 𝜕𝜆 = 0 :

𝜆 ⋆ = 𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝑠 𝐶 − 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 

𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝑠 𝐴 + 𝑠 𝐶 − 2 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 

. (A.2.38) This gives Eq. (31). The same two inequalities imply that this minimizer lies inside the convex interval. The numerator is positive because 

𝛼 2𝑑 + 𝑠 𝐶 − 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 > 0, (A.2.39) and 

1 − 𝜆 ⋆ = 𝑠 𝐴 − 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 

𝑄 𝐻 

> 0. (A.2.40) Therefore, 𝜆 ⋆ ∈ (0 , 1) . Since 𝐿 𝐻 (𝜆 ) is strictly convex and 𝜆 ⋆ is an interior minimizer, its leading MSE is smaller than the leading MSE at both pure-estimator endpoints 𝜆 = 0 and 𝜆 = 1 . The 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ) remainder in Eq. (26) gives the corresponding statement for the leading-order MSE expansion. It remains to relate the two inequalities 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐴 and 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐶 to the dynamical-parameter conditions. The inequality 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐴 follows from the lower-variance regime ̄𝜅 < 1 , because this gives 𝑠 𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐴 , and Eq. (A.2.14) gives 

𝑠 𝐴𝐶 = 𝜒 𝐴𝐶 

√𝑠 𝐴 𝑠 𝐶 + 𝑜 (𝑛 −1 ) with 𝜒 𝐴𝐶 ∈ (0 , 1) . The inequality 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐶 is guaranteed by Eq. (29). Finally, we show that these requirements can be jointly satisfied. As 𝑇 → ∞, 𝛼 = 𝑒 −𝛽𝑇 → 0, so √1 − 𝛼 → 1. Thus Eq. (29) can be satisfied for sufficiently large 𝑇 whenever 

𝜉 2 + 4 𝑎 2

𝜉 2 + 2 𝑎 2 < 𝜌 2 + 2 𝑎 2

𝜌 2 . (A.2.41) This inequality is equivalent to 

𝑎 2 > 𝜌 2 − 𝜉 2

2 . (A.2.42) Together with the sufficient condition for ̄𝜅 < 1,

𝑎 2 < 𝜌 2(𝜌 2 − 𝜉 2)

𝜉 2 , (A.2.43) we obtain the feasible design range 

𝜌 2 − 𝜉 2

2 < 𝑎 2 < 𝜌 2(𝜌 2 − 𝜉 2)

𝜉 2 . (A.2.44) When 𝜌 2 > 𝜉 2, this interval is nonempty. Thus, by choosing 𝑎 in this range and then choosing 𝑇 sufficiently large, the two inequalities 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐴 and 𝑠 𝐴𝐶 < 𝑠 𝐶 can be jointly satisfied. This proves Theorem 1. 

A.3. Derivations for Continuous-Time Stable Tracking 

This section gives the derivations supporting Section 4.4. The derivations follow the three parts of the main text: local continuous-time complementarity and synergy, spurious remote-peak suppression with continuous center evolution, and estimation fusion before final decoding. 

A.3.1. Local continuous-time complementarity and synergy 

Derivation of Eqs. (34) –(36) . We consider the local continuous-time regime in which the ANN estimate fluctuates around the ground-truth trajectory: ̂

𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 ) = 𝒙 ∗(𝑡 ) + 𝜺 (𝑡 ), 𝔼 [𝜺 (𝑡 )] = 𝟎 , (A.3.1)  

> Preprint Page 39 of 50

A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

with temporal covariance 

Cov( 𝜺 (𝑡 ), 𝜺 (𝑠 )) = 𝜎 2

> 𝐴

𝑒 −𝜂 𝜀 |𝑡 −𝑠 |𝐼 2. (A.3.2) In the local small-offset regime, the translational-mode reduction of the CANN center dynamics is approximated by the first-order system 

𝜏 ct ̇̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ) + ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ) = ̂ 𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 ), (A.3.3) where 𝜏 ct > 0 is the effective center-dynamics time constant. Using the stationary causal solution of this linear system, we have ̂

𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ) = ∫

> ∞0

1

𝜏 ct 

𝑒 −𝑢 ∕𝜏 ct ̂ 𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 − 𝑢 ) d 𝑢. (A.3.4) Substituting ̂ 𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 ) = 𝒙 ∗(𝑡 ) + 𝜺 (𝑡 ) gives ̂

𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ) = ∫

> ∞0

1

𝜏 ct 

𝑒 −𝑢 ∕𝜏 ct 𝒙 ∗(𝑡 − 𝑢 ) d 𝑢 + 𝜼 𝐶 (𝑡 ), (A.3.5) where 

𝜼 𝐶 (𝑡 ) = ∫

> ∞0

1

𝜏 ct 

𝑒 −𝑢 ∕𝜏 ct 𝜺 (𝑡 − 𝑢 ) d 𝑢. (A.3.6) Under the local constant-velocity approximation 

𝒙 ∗(𝑡 ) = 𝒙 ∗(0) + 𝒗 𝑡, (A.3.7) we have 𝒙 ∗(𝑡 − 𝑢 ) = 𝒙 ∗(𝑡 ) − 𝑢 𝒗 . Therefore, 

∫

> ∞0

1

𝜏 ct 

𝑒 −𝑢 ∕𝜏 ct 𝒙 ∗(𝑡 − 𝑢 ) d 𝑢 = 𝒙 ∗(𝑡 ) − 𝒗 ∫

> ∞0

𝑢 𝜏 ct 

𝑒 −𝑢 ∕𝜏 ct d𝑢 

= 𝒙 ∗(𝑡 ) − 𝜏 ct 𝒗 .

(A.3.8) Since 𝔼 [𝜼 𝐶 (𝑡 )] = 𝟎 , the ANN and CANN biases relative to 𝒙 ∗(𝑡 ) are 

Bias 𝐴 (𝑡 ) = 𝟎 , Bias 𝐶 (𝑡 ) = − 𝜏 ct 𝒗 . (A.3.9) We next compute the covariance of the CANN stochastic term. For one coordinate, write 𝜂 𝐶 (𝑡 ) for the corresponding scalar component of 𝜼 𝐶 (𝑡 ). Then 

Var( 𝜂 𝐶 (𝑡 )) = 𝜎 2 

> 𝐴

∫ 

> ∞0

∫

> ∞0

1

𝜏 2ct 

𝑒 −( 𝑢 +𝑤 )∕ 𝜏 ct 𝑒 −𝜂 𝜀 |𝑢 −𝑤 | d𝑢 d𝑤. (A.3.10) Let 𝑈 and 𝑊 be independent exponential random variables with rate 1∕ 𝜏 ct . The double integral equals 

𝔼 [𝑒 −𝜂 𝜀 |𝑈 −𝑊 |] . (A.3.11) For two independent exponential variables with the same rate, |𝑈 − 𝑊 | is exponential with rate 1∕ 𝜏 ct . Thus, 

𝔼 [𝑒 −𝜂 𝜀 |𝑈 −𝑊 |] = ∫

> ∞0

1

𝜏 ct 

𝑒 −𝑟 ∕𝜏 ct 𝑒 −𝜂 𝜀 𝑟 d𝑟 = 11 + 𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct 

. (A.3.12) Hence 

Cov( ̂𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 )) = Cov( 𝜼 𝐶 (𝑡 )) = 𝜎 2

> 𝐴

1 + 𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct 

𝐼 2. (A.3.13) 

Preprint Page 40 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

Together with 

Cov( ̂𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 )) = 𝜎 2

> 𝐴

𝐼 2, (A.3.14) this proves Eq. (34). The cross covariance between the ANN estimation error and the CANN stochastic term is 

Cov( 𝜺 (𝑡 ), 𝜼 𝐶 (𝑡 )) = ∫

> ∞0

1

𝜏 ct 

𝑒 −𝑢 ∕𝜏 ct Cov( 𝜺 (𝑡 ), 𝜺 (𝑡 − 𝑢 )) d 𝑢. (A.3.15) Using the exponential temporal covariance gives 

Cov( 𝜺 (𝑡 ), 𝜼 𝐶 (𝑡 )) = 𝜎 2 

> 𝐴

∫

> ∞0

1

𝜏 ct 

𝑒 −𝑢 ∕𝜏 ct 𝑒 −𝜂 𝜀 𝑢 d𝑢 𝐼 2 = 𝜎 2

> 𝐴

1 + 𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct 

𝐼 2. (A.3.16) Therefore, the scalar variance and cross term in the continuous-time local regime are 

𝑠 ct  

> 𝐴

= 2 𝜎 2

> 𝐴

, 𝑠 ct  

> 𝐶

= 2𝜎 2

> 𝐴

1 + 𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct 

, 𝑠 ct  

> 𝐴𝐶

= 2𝜎 2

> 𝐴

1 + 𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct 

. (A.3.17) For the convex additive estimate ̂

𝒙 𝐻 (𝑡 ; 𝜆 ) = 𝜆̂ 𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 ) + (1 − 𝜆 )̂𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ), 𝜆 ∈ [0 , 1] , (A.3.18) the leading bias is 

Bias 𝐻 (𝑡 ; 𝜆 ) = −(1 − 𝜆 )𝜏 ct 𝒗 . (A.3.19) Thus the continuous-time MSE is 

MSE ct  

> 𝐻

(𝜆 ) = (1 − 𝜆 )2𝜏 2ct ‖𝒗 ‖2 + 𝜆 2𝑠 ct  

> 𝐴

+ (1 − 𝜆 )2𝑠 ct  

> 𝐶

+ 2 𝜆 (1 − 𝜆 )𝑠 ct  

> 𝐴𝐶

. (A.3.20) Using 𝑠 ct  

> 𝐶

= 𝑠 ct  

> 𝐴𝐶

, this can be written as 

MSE ct  

> 𝐻

(𝜆 ) = (1 − 𝜆 )2𝜏 2ct ‖𝒗 ‖2 + 𝜆 2 (𝑠 ct  

> 𝐴

− 𝑠 ct 

> 𝐶

) + 𝑠 ct  

> 𝐶

. (A.3.21) Differentiating with respect to 𝜆 gives 

dd𝜆 MSE ct  

> 𝐻

(𝜆 ) = −2(1 − 𝜆 )𝜏 2ct ‖𝒗 ‖2 + 2 𝜆 (𝑠 ct  

> 𝐴

− 𝑠 ct 

> 𝐶

) . (A.3.22) The stationary point therefore satisfies 

𝜆 ⋆ 

> ct

= 𝜏 2ct ‖𝒗 ‖2

𝜏 2ct ‖𝒗 ‖2 + 𝑠 ct  

> 𝐴

− 𝑠 ct 

> 𝐶

. (A.3.23) Since 

𝑠 ct  

> 𝐴

− 𝑠 ct  

> 𝐶

= 2 𝜎 2 

> 𝐴

− 2𝜎 2

> 𝐴

1 + 𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct 

= 2𝜎 2

> 𝐴

𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct 

1 + 𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct 

, (A.3.24) we obtain 

𝜆 ⋆ 

> ct

= 𝜏 2ct ‖𝒗 ‖2

𝜏 2ct ‖𝒗 ‖2 + 2 𝜎 2

> 𝐴

𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct ∕(1 + 𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct ) . (A.3.25) When ‖𝒗 ‖ > 0 and 𝜂 𝜀 𝜏 ct > 0, both the numerator and the additional denominator term are positive, so 𝜆 ⋆ 

> ct

∈ (0 , 1) .

Preprint Page 41 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

A.3.2. Spurious remote-peak suppression and continuous center evolution 

Derivation of the remote-peak pull. Consider a Gaussian component of the ANN response map: 

𝐼 𝝁 ,𝜎,𝐴 (𝒙 ) = 𝐴 exp 

(

− ‖𝒙 − 𝝁 ‖2

2𝜎 2

)

, (A.3.26) where 𝐴 > 0 is the amplitude, 𝝁 ∈ ℝ2 is the peak center, and 𝜎 > 0 is the peak width. Under the single-bump approximation, 

𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) ≈ ̃ 𝑈 (𝒙 −̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 )) ,̃ 𝑈 (𝒖 ) = 𝑈 0 exp 

(

− ‖𝒖 ‖2

4𝑎 2

)

. (A.3.27) Let 𝒖 = 𝒙 −̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ) and 𝒒 = 𝝁 −̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ). Then 

𝐼 𝝁 ,𝜎,𝐴 (𝒖 ) = 𝐴 exp 

(

− ‖𝒖 − 𝒒 ‖2

2𝜎 2

)

. (A.3.28) The center motion is obtained by projecting the external-drive component onto the CANN translational modes. Using the same normalization as in Assumption (d), this projection gives a contribution of the form ̇̂ 

𝒙 (𝝁 ,𝜎,𝐴 ) 

> 𝐶

(𝑡 ) = 𝛽 (𝐴, 𝜎 ) exp 

(

− ‖𝝁 −̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 )‖2

2( 𝜎 2 + 2 𝑎 2)

) (𝝁 −̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 )). (A.3.29) The coefficient is 

𝛽 (𝐴, 𝜎 ) = 8𝐴𝑎 2𝜎 2

𝜏 𝑐 𝑈 0(𝜎 2 + 2 𝑎 2)2 . (A.3.30) We now derive Eq. (A.3.29) . The overlap between the Gaussian response component and the CANN activity bump is 

𝐹 𝜎 (𝒒 ) = ∫ℝ2

𝐼 𝝁 ,𝜎,𝐴 (𝒖 )̃𝑈 (𝒖 ) d 𝒖 . (A.3.31) Multiplying the two Gaussian functions gives 

𝐹 𝜎 (𝒒 ) = 4𝜋𝑎 2𝜎 2𝐴𝑈 0

𝜎 2 + 2 𝑎 2 exp 

(

− ‖𝒒 ‖2

2( 𝜎 2 + 2 𝑎 2)

)

. (A.3.32) The product of the two Gaussian functions has mean 

2𝑎 2

𝜎 2 + 2 𝑎 2 𝒒 . (A.3.33) Using 

𝜕 𝑢 𝑖 ̃ 𝑈 (𝒖 ) = − 𝑢 𝑖 

2𝑎 2̃ 𝑈 (𝒖 ), (A.3.34) the projection onto the 𝑖 -th translational direction is proportional to 

∫ℝ2

𝑢 𝑖 𝐼 𝝁 ,𝜎,𝐴 (𝒖 )̃𝑈 (𝒖 ) d 𝒖 = 2𝑎 2

𝜎 2 + 2 𝑎 2 𝑞 𝑖 𝐹 𝜎 (𝒒 ). (A.3.35) Substituting 𝐹 𝜎 (𝒒 ) and the translational-mode normalization gives Eq. (A.3.29). For the two-peak ANN response map in Eq. (37), the spurious component has 

𝐴 = 𝐴 𝑠 , 𝜎 = 𝜔 𝑠 , 𝝁 = 𝒙 𝑠 (𝑡 ). (A.3.36)  

> Preprint Page 42 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking

Let 

𝑟 𝑠 (𝑡 ) = ‖𝒙 𝑠 (𝑡 ) − ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 )‖. (A.3.37) Then the spurious peak contributes ̇̂ 

𝒙 𝐶,𝑠 (𝑡 ) = 𝛽 𝑠 exp 

(

− 𝑟 𝑠 (𝑡 )2

2( 𝜔 2 

> 𝑠

+ 2 𝑎 2)

) (𝒙 𝑠 (𝑡 ) − ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 )), (A.3.38) where 

𝛽 𝑠 = 8𝐴 𝑠 𝑎 2𝜔 2

> 𝑠

𝜏 𝑐 𝑈 0(𝜔 2 

> 𝑠

+ 2 𝑎 2)2 . (A.3.39) Its magnitude is 

‖̇̂ 𝒙 𝐶,𝑠 (𝑡 )‖ = 𝛽 𝑠 𝑟 𝑠 (𝑡 ) exp 

(

− 𝑟 𝑠 (𝑡 )2

2( 𝜔 2 

> 𝑠

+ 2 𝑎 2)

)

. (A.3.40) Define 

𝑔 (𝑟 ) = 𝑟 exp 

(

− 𝑟 2

2( 𝜔 2 

> 𝑠

+ 2 𝑎 2)

)

. (A.3.41) Then 

𝑔 ′(𝑟 ) = exp 

(

− 𝑟 2

2( 𝜔 2 

> 𝑠

+ 2 𝑎 2)

) ( 

1 − 𝑟 2

𝜔 2 

> 𝑠

+ 2 𝑎 2

)

. (A.3.42) Thus 𝑔 (𝑟 ) increases on 0 < 𝑟 < 

√

𝜔 2 

> 𝑠

+ 2 𝑎 2, reaches its maximum at 𝑟 =

√

𝜔 2 

> 𝑠

+ 2 𝑎 2, and decreases for 𝑟 > 

√

𝜔 2 

> 𝑠

+ 2 𝑎 2.This proves that a remote spurious peak affects the CANN estimate through a spatial-overlap-gated velocity contribution rather than through a direct coordinate jump. 

Derivation of continuous center evolution. The reduced CANN center dynamics is an ordinary differential equation whose dominant external-drive components have the form 

𝒒 ↦ 𝛽 exp 

(

− ‖𝒒 ‖2

2𝑆 

)

𝒒 , 𝑆 > 0. (A.3.43) This vector field is smooth in 𝒒 . Its Jacobian is 

𝐷 𝒒 

[

exp 

(

− ‖𝒒 ‖2

2𝑆 

)

𝒒 

]

= exp 

(

− ‖𝒒 ‖2

2𝑆 

) ( 

𝐼 − 𝒒𝒒 ⊤

𝑆 

)

, (A.3.44) which is locally bounded. Therefore, the reduced center vector field is locally Lipschitz in ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 whenever the response amplitudes and peak locations are locally bounded. If the response amplitudes and peak locations are locally bounded and measurable in time, and the mode-reduction remainder is locally integrable, the reduced center equation satisfies the standard Carathéodory conditions. Hence the CANN center trajectory is locally absolutely continuous: ̂

𝒙 𝐶 ∈ 𝐴𝐶 loc . (A.3.45) In particular, ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ) remains continuous and differentiable almost everywhere, even if the ANN argmax estimate switches discontinuously between response peaks.  

> Preprint Page 43 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking

A.3.3. Estimation fusion before final decoding 

Derivation of the local approximation in Eq. (40) . In the local unimodal regime, suppose that the ANN response map and the CANN activity bump are locally concentrated around nearby centers. Their second-order approximations can be written as 

𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) ≈ 𝐶 𝐴 − ℎ𝐴 

2 ‖𝒙 −̂ 𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 )‖2, (A.3.46) and 

𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) ≈ 𝐶 𝐶 − ℎ𝐶 

2 ‖𝒙 −̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 )‖2, (A.3.47) where ℎ𝐴 > 0 and ℎ𝐶 > 0 are local curvatures. For estimation fusion before decoding, define 

𝑆 𝐻 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) = 𝜆𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) + (1 − 𝜆 )𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ), 𝜆 ∈ [0 , 1] . (A.3.48) The local maximizer satisfies 

∇𝒙 𝑆 𝐻 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) = − 𝜆ℎ 𝐴 (𝒙 −̂ 𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 )) − (1 − 𝜆 )ℎ𝐶 (𝒙 −̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 )) = 𝟎 . (A.3.49) Solving for the local maximizer gives ̂

𝒙 𝐻 (𝑡 ) ≈ 𝜆ℎ 𝐴 ̂ 𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 ) + (1 − 𝜆 )ℎ𝐶 ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 )

𝜆ℎ 𝐴 + (1 − 𝜆 )ℎ𝐶 

. (A.3.50) When the two local curvatures are comparable, or when their ratio is absorbed into the fusion weight, this reduces to the convex additive approximation ̂

𝒙 𝐻 (𝑡 ) ≈ 𝜆̂ 𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 ) + (1 − 𝜆 )̂𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ). (A.3.51) This gives the local approximation used in Eq. (40). 

Support analysis under a remote spurious peak. The local approximation above does not apply when the ANN response contains a remote spurious peak. If the ANN argmax estimate jumps to the distractor while the CANN center remains near the target-side activity bump, directly averaging decoded estimates gives ̂

𝒙 dec (𝑡 ) = 𝜆̂ 𝒙 𝐴 (𝑡 ) + (1 − 𝜆 )̂𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ) ≈ 𝜆 𝒙 𝑠 (𝑡 ) + (1 − 𝜆 )̂𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ). (A.3.52) This point can lie between the target-side bump and the remote distractor peak, where neither branch assigns strong response support. Estimation fusion before final decoding instead forms 

𝑆 𝐻 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) = 𝜆𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) + (1 − 𝜆 )𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ),̂ 𝒙 𝐻 (𝑡 ) = arg max  

> 𝒙

𝑆 𝐻 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ). (A.3.53) To see how this preserves response support, assume that the CANN activity bump around its current center is locally 

𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) = 𝐶 𝑈 exp 

(

− ‖𝒙 −̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 )‖2

2𝜂 2

> 𝑈

)

, (A.3.54) where 𝐶 𝑈 > 0 is the bump amplitude and 𝜂 𝑈 > 0 is the local bump width. Let 

𝑅 𝑠 (𝑡 ) = ‖𝒙 𝑠 (𝑡 ) − ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 )‖. (A.3.55) When ̂ 𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ) remains close to the target-side peak and 𝑅 𝑠 (𝑡 ) is large, ignoring exponentially small cross-tail terms gives 

𝑆 𝐻 (̂𝒙 𝐶 (𝑡 ), 𝑡 ) ≈ 𝜆𝐴 ∗ + (1 − 𝜆 )𝐶 𝑈 , (A.3.56)                                        

> Preprint Page 44 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking
> Table B.1
> Architecture of the SiamFC feature extractor. BN denotes batch normalization.
> Layer Channels Kernel Stride Extra operations
> Conv1 3→96 11 × 11 2BN, ReLU, 3 × 3 max pool, stride 2 Conv2 96 →256 5 × 5 1groups=2, BN, ReLU, 3 × 3 max pool, stride 2 Conv3 256 →384 3 × 3 1BN, ReLU Conv4 384 →384 3 × 3 1groups=2, BN, ReLU Conv5 384 →256 3 × 3 1groups=2

whereas 

𝑆 𝐻 (𝒙 𝑠 (𝑡 ), 𝑡 ) ≈ 𝜆𝐴 𝑠 + (1 − 𝜆 )𝐶 𝑈 exp 

(

− 𝑅 𝑠 (𝑡 )2

2𝜂 2

> 𝑈

)

. (A.3.57) Thus the target-side fused score remains higher than the remote spurious peak whenever 

𝜆𝐴 ∗ + (1 − 𝜆 )𝐶 𝑈 > 𝜆𝐴 𝑠 + (1 − 𝜆 )𝐶 𝑈 exp 

(

− 𝑅 𝑠 (𝑡 )2

2𝜂 2

> 𝑈

)

. (A.3.58) Equivalently, 

𝜆 (𝐴 𝑠 − 𝐴 ∗) < (1 − 𝜆 )𝐶 𝑈 

[

1 − exp 

(

− 𝑅 𝑠 (𝑡 )2

2𝜂 2

> 𝑈

)] 

. (A.3.59) This sufficient inequality shows why the remote ANN peak receives weak support from the CANN activity bump, whereas the target-side response is reinforced near the current CANN center. Therefore, fusing 𝑆 𝐴 (𝒙 , 𝑡 ) and 𝑈 (𝒙 , 𝑡 )

before final decoding preserves response support under remote distractors, while direct averaging of decoded coordinates can produce an unsupported intermediate state. 

## B. Additional Implementation Details 

SiamFC feature branch. The SiamFC feature branch follows a fully convolutional Siamese matching design. Given the initial template patch 𝑽 (0) temp ∈ ℝ3×127×127 and the search patch at frame 𝑘 , 𝑽 (𝑘 )search ∈ ℝ3×255×255 , the two patches are processed by the same convolutional feature extractor 𝜑 (⋅). We describe the convolutional backbone explicitly in Table B.1. For the template patch, the backbone produces 𝜑 (𝑽 (0) temp ) ∈ ℝ256×6×6 . For the search patch, it produces 𝜑 (𝑽 (𝑘 )search ) ∈ 

ℝ256×22×22 . The ANN response map is computed by fully convolutional cross-correlation: 

𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐴

= 𝜑 (𝑽 (0) temp ) ⋆ 𝜑 (𝑽 (𝑘 )search ).

This operation is implemented as grouped convolution over the batch dimension and yields a 17 × 17 response map. Following the SiamFC implementation, 𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐴

is multiplied by a scalar output factor 10 −3 . During inference, 𝑆 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝐴

is upsampled and mapped onto the 𝑁 × 𝑁 toroidal grid used by the CANN branch. 

FlyNet feature branch. FlyNet is adapted from (Chancan et al., 2020) as a heuristic HNN feature branch under the same tracking interface. It replaces the convolutional feature extractor with a sparse projection and winner-take-all coding module. Each input patch is first converted to grayscale using luminance weights (0 .299 , 0.587 , 0.114) . The exemplar patch is center padded to 255 × 255 , and both exemplar and search patches are area-downsampled by a factor of 4. This gives a flattened vector of dimension 63 × 63 = 3969 for each branch. The exemplar and search vectors are concatenated into a pair representation of dimension 7938 . This vector is projected by a fixed sparse binary projection matrix into a 512-dimensional representation. For each projected unit, 10%                              

> Preprint Page 45 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking
> Table B.2
> Architecture of the HSTNN temporal response head.
> Module Input/state Kernel Channels Extra operations
> ConvGRU response, hidden state 3 × 3 1→16 update/reset gates, tanh candidate ConvLIF response, membrane/spike state 3 × 3 1→16 recurrent spike convolution, reset after spike Fuse Conv1 GRU hidden + LIF spike 1 × 1 32 →16 ReLU Fuse Conv2 fused feature 1 × 1 16 →1refined response output

of the input dimensions are sampled. A winner-take-all operation then keeps the largest 50% of the projected activations and binarizes the code. The resulting binary code is passed through a three-layer MLP: 

512 → 1024 → 1024 → 17 2.

The output is reshaped into a 17 × 17 response map. Thus, FlyNet shares the same downstream response-map interface as the SiamFC feature branch. 

HSTNN temporal branch. HSTNN is implemented as a SiamFC tracker augmented with a direct hybrid RNN-SNN temporal response head. The SiamFC feature extractor and cross-correlation head are kept fixed. At each frame, the tracker evaluates the same three search scales as SiamFC, upsamples the response maps to the 85 × 85 inference grid, applies the standard scale penalty, and selects the scale with the largest peak response. The selected response 

𝑟 𝑡 ∈ ℝ1×85×85 is min-max normalized before entering the temporal head. The temporal head contains two parallel recurrent cells. The first cell is a convolutional GRU with a 3 × 3 kernel. The second cell is a convolutional leaky integrate-and-fire module: 

𝑢 𝑡 = 𝜆𝑢 𝑡 −1 + 𝑊 𝑥 ∗ 𝑟 𝑡 + 𝑊 𝑠 ∗ 𝑠 𝑡 −1 , 𝑠 𝑡 = 𝕀 [𝑢 𝑡 ≥ 𝜃 ],

where the reported HSTNN setting uses 𝜆 = 0 .85 , 𝜃 = 1 .0, and 16 hidden channels. During training, the spike function is optimized with a surrogate gradient, and the membrane is reset after spikes. We summarize the temporal-head architecture in Table B.2. The fused output is the refined response map. During tracking, the argmax of this refined response replaces the SiamFC response peak for target localization, while the scale and target-size update follow the standard SiamFC rule. 

Training details for feature branches. The SiamFC and FlyNet feature branches are trained on the GOT-10k training split. The SiamFC branch is trained for 50 epochs, and the FlyNet branch is trained for 10 epochs. Training uses randomly sampled exemplar-search image pairs. The exemplar crop has size 127 × 127 , and the search crop has size 

255 × 255 . The training augmentation includes random image stretching and random crop perturbations around the target. For SiamFC, the training target is a binary logistic response label on the 17 × 17 response map. Positive locations are defined around the response center, and negative locations are defined outside the positive region. The loss is a class-balanced binary cross-entropy loss over response-map locations. For FlyNet, the search crop is randomly translated during training. The target center inside the translated search crop is used to construct a response-map label centered at the corresponding location. FlyNet is trained with the same class-balanced binary cross-entropy objective as SiamFC. The SiamFC and FlyNet feature branches use stochastic gradient descent with momentum 0.9, weight decay 5×10 −4 ,initial learning rate 10 −3 , and an exponential learning-rate schedule toward 10 −5 . Unless otherwise specified, the batch size is 64. 

Training details for HSTNN. HSTNN is trained on GOT-10k temporal segments after loading the corresponding SiamFC checkpoint. The SiamFC network is frozen, and only the temporal head is optimized. Each training sample is a contiguous sequence segment. At each temporal step, the template is taken from the first frame, while the search crop is centered on the previous ground-truth box. The selected SiamFC response is normalized and passed through the  

> Preprint Page 46 of 50

A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

temporal head. The target is a normalized Gaussian response centered at the current ground-truth displacement on the 

85 × 85 response grid. The temporal objective averages losses over the sequence. For each step, it uses cross-entropy between the target Gaussian distribution and the softmax of the refined response, plus a weighted center regression term computed from the soft-argmax response center. The center loss weight is 0.1, and the Gaussian standard deviation is 2 response-grid cells. The reported HSTNN checkpoint uses 8-frame segments, 16 hidden channels, batch size 4, AdamW with learning rate 10 −3 , weight decay 10 −4 , gradient clipping at 10, and the 200-iteration checkpoint. 

Evaluation details for GOT-10k and VOT2019. The official toolkit do not directly report SR for GOT-10k and VOT2019. Therefore, in addition to the official toolkit outputs, we recompute SR from the saved tracking results to make the success-rate results comparable across datasets. For GOT-10k, we follow the official validation-set filtering convention and evaluate only visible frames after the initial frame. For VOT2019, we parse the unsupervised tracking outputs and compute the same metric over valid evaluated frames. This post-processing only augments the reported evaluation metrics and does not change the underlying tracking results. 

## CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Yancheng Zhou: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Data curation, Validation, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft. Hanle Zheng: Methodology, Investigation. Lei Deng: Conceptualization, Methodology, Resources, Writing - original draft. Yujie Wu: Conceptualization, Methodology, Project administration, Writing -review & editing, Supervision. 

## Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

## Acknowledgements 

This work was partially supported by Brain Science and Brain-like Intelligence Technology-National Science and Technology Major Project 2021ZD0200300, Hong Kong Polytechnic University under Project P0058180, PP0055934, and PolyU15217625 for GRF project funded in 2025/26 Exercise. 

## Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the manuscript preparation process 

During the preparation of this work, the authors used OpenAI Codex to assist with code drafting and editing. After using this tool, the authors reviewed, tested where applicable, and edited the output as needed. The authors take full responsibility for the content of the manuscript. 

## References              

> Ahmed, S.H., Finkbeiner, J., Neftci, E., 2025. Efficient event-based object detection: A hybrid neural network with spatial and temporal attention, in: 2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE. p. 13970–13979. URL: http: //dx.doi.org/10.1109/cvpr52734.2025.01304 , doi: 10.1109/cvpr52734.2025.01304 .Angelaki, D.E., Laurens, J., 2020. The head direction cell network: attractor dynamics, integration within the navigation system, and three-dimensional properties. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 60, 136–144. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2019.12.002 ,doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2019.12.002 .Aydin, A., Gehrig, M., Gehrig, D., Scaramuzza, D., 2024. A hybrid ann-snn architecture for low-power and low-latency visual perception, in: 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW), IEEE. p. 5701–5711. URL: http: //dx.doi.org/10.1109/cvprw63382.2024.00579 , doi: 10.1109/cvprw63382.2024.00579 .Bertinetto, L., Valmadre, J., Henriques, J.F., Vedaldi, A., Torr, P.H.S., 2016. Fully-Convolutional Siamese Networks for Object Tracking. Springer International Publishing. chapter 56. p. 850–865. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-48881-3_56 , doi: 10.1007/ 978-3-319-48881-3_56 .Bolme, D., Beveridge, J.R., Draper, B.A., Lui, Y.M., 2010. Visual object tracking using adaptive correlation filters, in: 2010 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, IEEE. p. 2544–2550. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/cvpr.2010.5539960 ,doi: 10.1109/cvpr.2010.5539960 .

Preprint Page 47 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

Burak, Y., Fiete, I.R., 2009. Accurate path integration in continuous attractor network models of grid cells. PLoS Computational Biology 5, e1000291. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000291 , doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000291 .Chancan, M., Hernandez-Nunez, L., Narendra, A., Barron, A.B., Milford, M., 2020. A hybrid compact neural architecture for visual place recognition. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5, 993–1000. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/lra.2020.2967324 , doi: 10.1109/lra.2020. 2967324 .Chen, X., Peng, H., Wang, D., Lu, H., Hu, H., 2023. Seqtrack: Sequence to sequence learning for visual object tracking, in: 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE. p. 14572–14581. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/cvpr52729. 2023.01400 , doi: 10.1109/cvpr52729.2023.01400 .Chen, X., Yan, B., Zhu, J., Lu, H., Ruan, X., Wang, D., 2022. High-performance transformer tracking. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 1–16URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tpami.2022.3232535 , doi: 10.1109/tpami.2022.3232535 .Chen, Y., Hua, M., Sun, X., Peng, J., 2026. Continuous attractor dynamics in spatial navigation: from population geometry to flexible computation. Frontiers in Neuroscience 20. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2026.1788255 , doi: 10.3389/fnins.2026.1788255 .Deng, L., Zou, Z., Ma, X., Liang, L., Wang, G., Hu, X., Liu, L., Pei, J., Li, G., Xie, Y., 2018. Fast object tracking on a many-core neural network chip. Frontiers in Neuroscience 12. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2018.00841 , doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00841 .Dunnhofer, M., Furnari, A., Farinella, G.M., Micheloni, C., 2022. Visual object tracking in first person vision. International Journal of Computer Vision 131, 259–283. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11263-022-01694-6 , doi: 10.1007/s11263-022-01694-6 .Ess, A., Leibe, B., Schindler, K., Van Gool, L., 2008. A mobile vision system for robust multi-person tracking, in: 2008 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, IEEE. p. 1–8. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/cvpr.2008.4587581 , doi: 10.1109/cvpr. 2008.4587581 .Fan, H., Lin, L., Yang, F., Chu, P., Deng, G., Yu, S., Bai, H., Xu, Y., Liao, C., Ling, H., 2019. Lasot: A high-quality benchmark for large-scale single object tracking, in: 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE. p. 5369–5378. URL: 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/cvpr.2019.00552 , doi: 10.1109/cvpr.2019.00552 .Fung, C.C.A., Wong, K.Y.M., Wu, S., 2009. Tracking dynamics of two-dimensional continuous attractor neural networks. Journal of Physics: Conference Series 197, 012017. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/197/1/012017 , doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/197/1/ 012017 .Fung, C.C.A., Wong, K.Y.M., Wu, S., 2010. A moving bump in a continuous manifold: A comprehensive study of the tracking dynamics of continuous attractor neural networks. Neural Computation 22, 752–792. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/neco.2009.07-08-824 ,doi: 10.1162/neco.2009.07-08-824 .Galoogahi, H.K., Fagg, A., Huang, C., Ramanan, D., Lucey, S., 2017. Need for speed: A benchmark for higher frame rate object tracking, in: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), IEEE. p. 1134–1143. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/iccv.2017.128 ,doi: 10.1109/iccv.2017.128 .Gardner, R.J., Hermansen, E., Pachitariu, M., Burak, Y., Baas, N.A., Dunn, B.A., Moser, M.B., Moser, E.I., 2022. Toroidal topology of population activity in grid cells. Nature 602, 123–128. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04268-7 , doi: 10.1038/ s41586-021-04268-7 .Guo, D., Wang, J., Cui, Y., Wang, Z., Chen, S., 2020. Siamcar: Siamese fully convolutional classification and regression for visual tracking, in: 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE. p. 6268–6276. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ cvpr42600.2020.00630 , doi: 10.1109/cvpr42600.2020.00630 .He, W., Wu, Y., Deng, L., Li, G., Wang, H., Tian, Y., Ding, W., Wang, W., Xie, Y., 2020. Comparing snns and rnns on neuromorphic vision datasets: Similarities and differences. Neural Networks 132, 108–120. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2020.08.001 ,doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2020.08.001 .Henriques, J.F., Caseiro, R., Martins, P., Batista, J., 2015. High-speed tracking with kernelized correlation filters. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 37, 583–596. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tpami.2014.2345390 , doi: 10.1109/tpami.2014.2345390 .Huang, L., Zhao, X., Huang, K., 2021. Got-10k: A large high-diversity benchmark for generic object tracking in the wild. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 43, 1562–1577. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tpami.2019.2957464 , doi: 10.1109/ tpami.2019.2957464 .Kadam, P., Fang, G., Zou, J.J., 2024. Object tracking using computer vision: A review. Computers 13, 136. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ computers13060136 , doi: 10.3390/computers13060136 .Khona, M., Fiete, I.R., 2022. Attractor and integrator networks in the brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 23, 744–766. URL: http: //dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41583-022-00642-0 , doi: 10.1038/s41583-022-00642-0 .Kim, S.S., Rouault, H., Druckmann, S., Jayaraman, V., 2017. Ring attractor dynamics in the <i>drosophila</i> central brain. Science 356, 849–853. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aal4835 , doi: 10.1126/science.aal4835 .Kristan, M., Matas, J., Leonardis, A., Felsberg, M., Pflugfelder, R., Kamarainen, J.K., Zajc, L.C., Drbohlav, O., Lukezic, A., Berg, A., Eldesokey, A., Kapyla, J., Fernandez, G., Gonzalez-Garcia, A., Memarmoghadam, A., Lu, A., He, A., Varfolomieiev, A., Chan, A., Tripathi, A.S., Smeulders, A., Pedasingu, B.S., Chen, B.X., Zhang, B., Wu, B., Li, B., He, B., Yan, B., Bai, B., Li, B., Li, B., Kim, B.H., Ma, C., Fang, C., Qian, C., Chen, C., Li, C., Zhang, C., Tsai, C.Y., Luo, C., Micheloni, C., Zhang, C., Tao, D., Gupta, D., Song, D., Wang, D., Gavves, E., Yi, E., Khan, F.S., Zhang, F., Wang, F., Zhao, F., Ath, G.D., Bhat, G., Chen, G., Wang, G., Li, G., Cevikalp, H., Du, H., Zhao, H., Saribas, H., Jung, H.M., Bai, H., Yu, H., Peng, H., Lu, H., Li, H., Li, J., Li, J., Fu, J., Chen, J., Gao, J., Zhao, J., Tang, J., Li, J., Wu, J., Liu, J., Wang, J., Qi, J., Zhang, J., Tsotsos, J.K., Lee, J.H., Weijer, J.v.d., Kittler, J., Lee, J.H., Zhuang, J., Zhang, K., Wang, K., Dai, K., Chen, L., Liu, L., Guo, L., Zhang, L., Wang, L., Wang, L., Zhang, L., Wang, L., Zhou, L., Zheng, L., Rout, L., Gool, L.V., Bertinetto, L., Danelljan, M., Dunnhofer, M., Ni, M., Kim, M.Y., Tang, M., Yang, M.H., Paluru, N., Martinel, N., Xu, P., Zhang, P., Zheng, P., Zhang, P., Torr, P.H., Wang, Q.Z.Q., Guo, Q., Timofte, R., Gorthi, R.K., Everson, R., Han, R., Zhang, R., You, S., Zhao, S.C., Zhao, S., Li, S., Li, S., Ge, S., Bai, S., Guan, S., Xing, T., Xu, T., Yang, T., Zhang, T., Vojir, T., Feng, W., Hu, W., Wang, W., Tang, W., Zeng, W., Liu, W., Chen, X., Qiu, X., Bai, X., Wu, X.J., Yang, X., Chen, X., Li, X., Sun, X., Chen, X., Tian, X., Tang, X., Zhu, X.F., Huang, Y., Chen, Y., Lian, Y., Gu, Y., Liu, Y., Chen, Y., Zhang, Y., Xu, Y., Wang, Y., Li, Y., Zhou, Y., Dong, Y., Xu, Y., Zhang, Y., Li, 

Preprint Page 48 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

Y., Luo, Z.W.Z., Zhang, Z., Feng, Z.H., He, Z., Song, Z., Chen, Z., Zhang, Z., Wu, Z., Xiong, Z., Huang, Z., Teng, Z., Ni, Z., 2019. The seventh visual object tracking vot2019 challenge results, in: 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision Workshop (ICCVW), IEEE. p. 2206–2241. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/iccvw.2019.00276 , doi: 10.1109/iccvw.2019.00276 .Li, B., Wu, W., Wang, Q., Zhang, F., Xing, J., Yan, J., 2019. Siamrpn++: Evolution of siamese visual tracking with very deep networks, in: 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE. p. 4277–4286. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ cvpr.2019.00441 , doi: 10.1109/cvpr.2019.00441 .Li, G., Deng, L., Tang, H., Pan, G., Tian, Y., Roy, K., Maass, W., 2024. Brain-inspired computing: A systematic survey and future trends. Proceedings of the IEEE 112, 544–584. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/jproc.2024.3429360 , doi: 10.1109/jproc.2024.3429360 .Liang, P., Blasch, E., Ling, H., 2015. Encoding color information for visual tracking: Algorithms and benchmark. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 24, 5630–5644. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tip.2015.2482905 , doi: 10.1109/tip.2015.2482905 .Lin, H., Shi, L., Zhao, R., Zheng, H., 2022. Dance of snn and ann: Solving binding problem by combining spike timing and reconstructive attention, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, Neural Information Processing Systems Foundation, Inc. (NeurIPS). p. 31430–31443. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.52202/068431-2279 , doi: 10.52202/068431-2279 .Liu, F., Zhao, R., 2022. Enhancing spiking neural networks with hybrid top-down attention. Frontiers in Neuroscience 16. URL: http: //dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2022.949142 , doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.949142 .Liu, F., Zheng, H., Ma, S., Zhang, W., Liu, X., Chua, Y., Shi, L., Zhao, R., 2024. Advancing brain-inspired computing with hybrid neural networks. National Science Review 11. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nsr/nwae066 , doi: 10.1093/nsr/nwae066 .Mueller, M., Smith, N., Ghanem, B., 2016. A Benchmark and Simulator for UAV Tracking. Springer International Publishing. chapter 27. p. 445–461. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0_27 , doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0_27 .Müller, M., Bibi, A., Giancola, S., Alsubaihi, S., Ghanem, B., 2018. TrackingNet: A Large-Scale Dataset and Benchmark for Object Tracking in the Wild. Springer International Publishing. chapter 19. p. 310–327. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_19 ,doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-01246-5_19 .Pei, J., Deng, L., Song, S., Zhao, M., Zhang, Y., Wu, S., Wang, G., Zou, Z., Wu, Z., He, W., Chen, F., Deng, N., Wu, S., Wang, Y., Wu, Y., Yang, Z., Ma, C., Li, G., Han, W., Li, H., Wu, H., Zhao, R., Xie, Y., Shi, L., 2019. Towards artificial general intelligence with hybrid tianjic chip architecture. Nature 572, 106–111. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1424-8 , doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1424-8 .Seeholzer, A., Deger, M., Gerstner, W., 2019. Stability of working memory in continuous attractor networks under the control of short-term plasticity. PLOS Computational Biology 15, e1006928. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006928 , doi: 10.1371/ journal.pcbi.1006928 .Strohmer, B., Stagsted, R.K., Manoonpong, P., Larsen, L.B., 2021. Integrating non-spiking interneurons in spiking neural networks. Frontiers in Neuroscience 15. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2021.633945 , doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.633945 .Sun, H., Wang, J., Cai, W., Chen, D., Liao, Q., He, J., Cui, Y., Yao, D., Guo, D., 2025. St-flownet: An efficient spiking neural network for event-based optical flow estimation. Neural Networks 190, 107730. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2025.107730 ,doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2025.107730 .Vafidis, P., Owald, D., D’Albis, T., Kempter, R., 2022. Learning accurate path integration in ring attractor models of the head direction system. eLife 11. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/elife.69841 , doi: 10.7554/elife.69841 .Wang, Q., Zhang, L., Bertinetto, L., Hu, W., Torr, P.H., 2019. Fast online object tracking and segmentation: A unifying approach, in: 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE. p. 1328–1338. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/cvpr.2019. 00142 , doi: 10.1109/cvpr.2019.00142 .Wang, X., Qi, S., Zhao, J., Zhou, H., Zhang, S., Wang, G., Tu, K., Guo, S., Zhao, J., Li, J., Qin, H., Yang, M., 2025. Mctrack: A unified 3d multi-object tracking framework for autonomous driving, in: 2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE. p. 4551–4558. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/iros60139.2025.11245874 , doi: 10.1109/iros60139.2025.11245874 .Wei, X., Bai, Y., Zheng, Y., Shi, D., Gong, Y., 2023. Autoregressive visual tracking, in: 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE. p. 9697–9706. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/cvpr52729.2023.00935 , doi: 10.1109/cvpr52729. 2023.00935 .Wimmer, K., Nykamp, D.Q., Constantinidis, C., Compte, A., 2014. Bump attractor dynamics in prefrontal cortex explains behavioral precision in spatial working memory. Nature Neuroscience 17, 431–439. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nn.3645 , doi: 10.1038/nn.3645 .Wojtak, W., Coombes, S., Avitabile, D., Bicho, E., Erlhagen, W., 2023. Robust working memory in a two-dimensional continuous attrac-tor network. Cognitive Neurodynamics 18, 3273–3289. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11571-023-09979-3 , doi: 10.1007/ s11571-023-09979-3 .Woźniak, S., Pantazi, A., Bohnstingl, T., Eleftheriou, E., 2020. Deep learning incorporating biologically inspired neural dynamics and in-memory computing. Nature Machine Intelligence 2, 325–336. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s42256-020-0187-0 , doi: 10.1038/ s42256-020-0187-0 .Wu, S., Wong, K.Y.M., Fung, C.C.A., Mi, Y., Zhang, W., 2016. Continuous attractor neural networks: Candidate of a canonical model for neural information representation. F1000Research 5, 156. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.7387.1 , doi: 10.12688/ f1000research.7387.1 .Wu, Y., Lim, J., Yang, M.H., 2015. Object tracking benchmark. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 37, 1834–1848. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tpami.2014.2388226 , doi: 10.1109/tpami.2014.2388226 .Wu, Y., Shi, B., Zheng, Z., Zheng, H., Yu, F., Liu, X., Luo, G., Deng, L., 2024. Adaptive spatiotemporal neural networks through complementary hybridization. Nature Communications 15. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51641-x , doi: 10.1038/ s41467-024-51641-x .Xiao, S., Li, Y., Kim, Y., Lee, D., Panda, P., 2025. Respike: residual frames-based hybrid spiking neural networks for efficient action recognition. Neuromorphic Computing and Engineering 5, 014009. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/2634-4386/adb070 , doi: 10. 1088/2634-4386/adb070 .

Preprint Page 49 of 50 A Theory-grounded Hybrid Neural Network for Stable Visual Object Tracking 

Xue, C., Zhong, B., Liang, Q., Zheng, Y., Li, N., Xue, Y., Song, S., 2025. Similarity-guided layer-adaptive vision transformer for uav tracking, in: 2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE. p. 6730–6740. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10. 1109/cvpr52734.2025.00631 , doi: 10.1109/cvpr52734.2025.00631 .Yu, F., Wu, Y., Ma, S., Xu, M., Li, H., Qu, H., Song, C., Wang, T., Zhao, R., Shi, L., 2023. Brain-inspired multimodal hybrid neural network for robot place recognition. Science Robotics 8. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.abm6996 , doi: 10.1126/scirobotics. abm6996 .Yu, L., Chu, T., Zhao, Z., Mi, Y., Yang, Y., Wu, S., 2019. Spiking continuous attractor neural networks with spike frequency adaptation for anticipative tracking, in: 2019 IEEE International Workshop on Future Computing (IWOFC), IEEE. p. 1–3. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10. 1109/iwofc48002.2019.9078445 , doi: 10.1109/iwofc48002.2019.9078445 .Zador, A., Escola, S., Richards, B., Ölveczky, B., Bengio, Y., Boahen, K., Botvinick, M., Chklovskii, D., Churchland, A., Clopath, C., DiCarlo, J., Ganguli, S., Hawkins, J., Körding, K., Koulakov, A., LeCun, Y., Lillicrap, T., Marblestone, A., Olshausen, B., Pouget, A., Savin, C., Sejnowski, T., Simoncelli, E., Solla, S., Sussillo, D., Tolias, A.S., Tsao, D., 2023. Catalyzing next-generation artificial intelligence through neuroai. Nature Communications 14. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37180-x , doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-37180-x .Zhang, Y., Qu, P., Ji, Y., Zhang, W., Gao, G., Wang, G., Song, S., Li, G., Chen, W., Zheng, W., Chen, F., Pei, J., Zhao, R., Zhao, M., Shi, L., 2020. A system hierarchy for brain-inspired computing. Nature 586, 378–384. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2782-y ,doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2782-y .Zhao, R., Yang, Z., Zheng, H., Wu, Y., Liu, F., Wu, Z., Li, L., Chen, F., Song, S., Zhu, J., Zhang, W., Huang, H., Xu, M., Sheng, K., Yin, Q., Pei, J., Li, G., Zhang, Y., Zhao, M., Shi, L., 2022. A framework for the general design and computation of hybrid neural networks. Nature Communications 13. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30964-7 , doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-30964-7 .Zhao, S., Xu, T., Wu, X.J., Kittler, J., 2023. A spatio-temporal robust tracker with spatial-channel transformer and jitter suppression. International Journal of Computer Vision 132, 1645–1658. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11263-023-01902-x , doi: 10.1007/ s11263-023-01902-x .

Preprint Page 50 of 50