Title: ORMOT: A Dataset and Framework for Omnidirectional Referring Multi-Object Tracking

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.05384v1

Published Time: Fri, 06 Mar 2026 02:27:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# ORMOT: A Dataset and Framework for Omnidirectional Referring Multi-Object Tracking 

Sijia Chen a,1 , Zihan Zhou a,1 , Yanqiu Yu a, En Yu a, Wenbing Tao a, ∗

> aState Key Laboratory of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology, School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, Hubei, China

Abstract 

Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) is a fundamental task in computer vision, aiming to track targets across video frames. Existing MOT methods perform well in general visual scenes, but face significant challenges and limitations when extended to visual-language settings. To bridge this gap, the task of Referring Multi-Object Tracking (RMOT) has recently been proposed, which aims to track objects that correspond to language descriptions. However, current RMOT methods are primarily developed on datasets captured by conventional cameras, which suffer from limited field of view. This constraint often causes targets to move out of the frame, leading to fragmented tracking and loss of contextual information. In this work, we propose a novel task, called Omnidirectional Referring Multi-Object 

Tracking ( ORMOT ), which extends RMOT to omnidirectional imagery, aiming to overcome the field-of-view (FoV) limitation of conventional datasets and improve the model’s ability to understand long-horizon language descriptions. To advance the ORMOT task, we construct ORSet , an Omnidirectional Referring Multi-Object Tracking dataset, which contains 27 diverse omnidirectional scenes, 848 language descriptions, and 3,401 annotated objects, providing rich visual, temporal, and language information. Furthermore, we propose ORTrack , a Large Vision-Language Model (LVLM)-driven framework tailored for Omnidirectional Referring Multi-Object Tracking. Extensive experiments on the ORSet dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our ORTrack framework. The dataset and code will be open-sourced at https://github.com/chen-si-jia/ORMOT .

Keywords: Omnidirectional Cameras, Referring Multi-Object Tracking, ORSet Dataset, ORTrack Framework 

1. Introduction 

Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) is a fundamental re-search topic in computer vision, widely applied in scenarios such as autonomous driving [1] and video surveillance [2]. While existing MOT methods have achieved remarkable success in general visual scenar-ios, they struggle to handle vision-language scenarios, where the goal is to track objects described by lan-guage descriptions. To address this, the task of Refer-ring Multi-Object Tracking (RMOT) [3] has been pro-posed, aiming to track objects that correspond to spe-cific language descriptions.       

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email addresses: sijiachen@hust.edu.cn (Sijia Chen),
> m202473798@hust.edu.cn (Zihan Zhou),
> yanqiuyu6@hust.edu.cn (Yanqiu Yu),
> yuen@hust.edu.cn (En Yu), wenbingtao@hust.edu.cn
> (Wenbing Tao)
> 1Equal contribution

However, existing RMOT methods are trained and evaluated on datasets captured by conventional cameras with a limited field of view. As a result, when the cam-era moves or targets leave the frame, the tracking pro-cess becomes fragmented and fails to align with long-horizon language descriptions. As illustrated in Fig-ure 1, given the language description "People who push open the door and then go up the stairs.", conventional RMOT models can only perceive a portion of the scene. When the door area is outside the field of view, the model loses key contextual cues from the "push open the door" action and therefore incorrectly tracks all people going upstairs. To overcome these limitations of conventional cam-eras, we extend RMOT to omnidirectional imagery, es-tablishing a new task termed Omnidirectional Referring 

Multi-Object Tracking (ORMOT ). The omnidirec-tional imagery offers two advantages: (1) it provides continuous spatial coverage, ensuring that all relevant targets remain visible throughout the sequence, and (2)                           

> arXiv:2603.05384v1 [cs.CV] 5 Mar 2026 2
> 1
> 3
> 4
> Referring Multi -Object Tracking (RMOT) Omnidirectional Referring Multi -Object Tracking (ORMOT)
> ORMOT ORMOT RMOT RMOT Language Description :
> People who push open the door and then go up the stairs .
> Language Description :
> People who push open the door and then go up the stairs .
> ...
> Conventional Camera View
> Omnidirectional Camera View
> Analysis :Unable to identify 'door' . Defaulting
> to tracking all objects ascending stairs .
> Result :Track [ID=1, 2, 3, 4 ]
> Analysis : ID 1 and ID 2 go up the stairs from
> the corridor, ID 3 and ID 4push open the door
> on the right and then go up the stairs .
> Result :Track [ID= 3, 4 ]Figure 1: Comparison between RMOT and ORMOT. The wide field of view from the omnidirectional camera not only provides spatial advan-tages but also extends tracking duration by offering "extended temporal context", enabling ORMOT models to correctly understand long-horizon language description and accurately track objects. In contrast, conventional cameras have limited fields of view, making it more difficult for existing common RMOT models to understand long-horizon language description and perform accurate tracking.

it improves language comprehension by capturing a broader spatial context and inter-object relations, which are critical for understanding long-horizon language de-scriptions (e.g., actions, spatial relations, and group be-haviors). As shown in Figure 1, The models of ORMOT can correctly identify the specific objects (ID=3,4) in the action of "push open the door and then go up the stairs" effectively avoiding semantic confusion. To advance the research on the Omnidirectional Re-ferring Multi-Object Tracking (ORMOT) task, we con-struct ORSet , an Omnidirectional Referring Multi-Object Tracking dataset built upon the JackRabbot Dataset and Benchmark (JRDB) [4]. ORSet contains 848 language descriptions covering omnidirectional-specific characteristics, appearance, and actions, with 3,401 annotated objects and their corresponding bound-ing boxes and spatiotemporal trajectories across 27 dif-ferent omnidirectional scenes (17 for training and 10 for testing). This dataset provides a vital platform for re-searching zero-shot generalization, temporal grounding, and multimodal alignment. Furthermore, we propose ORTrack , a Large Vision-Language Model (LVLM)-driven framework designed for Omnidirectional Referring Multi-Object Tracking. ORTrack leverages the open-vocabulary reasoning and multimodal understanding of Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) [5] to align arbitrary natural lan-guage descriptions with 360° visual scenes. Unlike con-ventional detectors restricted to predefined categories, it supports zero-shot, language-guided detection and tracks objects across frames without category-specific retraining. To ensure robust identity preservation in omnidirectional imagery, ORTrack employs a two-stage cropping-based feature extraction that captures both global contextual cues and fine-grained local details, followed by cross-frame association via feature similar-ity and Hungarian matching [6]. This design enables flexible and accurate referring multi-object tracking in complex 360° environments. Finally, we evaluate our ORTrack framework on the ORSet dataset under zero-shot conditions, compar-ing it with representative open-source RMOT methods. The results show that ORTrack achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance, outperforming other methods in both detection and association metrics. Notably, it demonstrates robust identity preservation, high recall, and strong generalization to unseen objects and com-plex omnidirectional scenes, highlighting its effective-ness for omnidirectional referring multi-object tracking. In summary, our main contributions are as follows: 2• We propose a novel task, called Omnidirectional Referring Multi-Object Tracking (ORMOT) ,which extends RMOT to omnidirectional imagery. This setting not only alleviates the field-of-view (FoV) limitation of conventional cameras but also improves the model’s ability to understand long-horizon language descriptions. • We construct ORSet , an Omnidirectional Referring Multi-Object Tracking dataset, which includes 27 different omnidirectional scenes, 848 language de-scriptions, and 3,401 annotated objects, serving as a comprehensive platform for research on the om-nidirectional referring multi-object tracking task. • We propose ORTrack , a Large Vision-Language Model (LVLM)-driven framework designed for Omnidirectional Referring Multi-Object Track-ing. Extensive experiments on the ORSet dataset demonstrate that the ORTrack framework achieves 

state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance, validating its effectiveness in complex 360° scenarios, provid-ing a baseline for the ORMOT task. 

2. Related Work 

2.1. Multi-Object Tracking 

Multi-object tracking (MOT) aims to maintain con-sistent object identities across video frames. Early methods follow the tracking-by-detection paradigm [7– 11], where detections are linked over time using mo-tion and appearance cues. Although simple and effec-tive, these pipelines depend heavily on detector quality and often struggle in crowded or occluded scenes. To improve robustness, joint detection-and-tracking frame-works [12–17] integrate localization and association in an end-to-end manner by learning deep re-identification features, leading to better spatial-temporal consis-tency. Transformer-based trackers [18–25] further en-hance temporal reasoning and global context modeling through self-attention, achieving stronger long-range association and occlusion handling. Recent research trends focus on unified paradigms. MOTIP [25] refor-mulates MOT as an identity prediction task, directly de-coding object IDs without explicit data association. 

2.2. Referring Multi-Object Tracking 

Referring Multi-Object Tracking (RMOT) guides the tracking of multiple objects in videos through language descriptions, enabling more flexible and semantically aware multi-object association. Research in this field can be broadly categorized into two types. End-to-end methods integrate language grounding and object tracking into a unified optimization framework, thereby enhancing cross-modal reasoning and temporal consis-tency. For instance, TransRMOT [3] employs a Trans-former architecture to jointly model visual and textual information, TempRMOT [26] stabilizes object trajec-tories via temporal language attention, and ROMOT [27] improves object association in open-set scenarios through enhanced expression understanding. In con-trast, two-stage methods first generate object trajecto-ries and then match them with the corresponding lan-guage descriptions. iKUN [28] presents an identity-matching mechanism that does not require retraining, while ReferGPT [29] leverages large pre-trained vision-language models to achieve zero-shot referring track-ing. CDRMT [30] further enhances multimodal inte-gration through cognitive decoupling. CRMOT [31] ex-tends RMOT to cross-view settings, enabling language-guided identity association across different viewpoints. DRMOT [32] introduces an RGBD referring multi-object tracking dataset and a unified L-RGB-D frame-work that leverages depth-aware grounding and depth-assisted association to improve trajectory linking and identity preservation under depth-sensitive descriptions and heavy occlusion. RT-RMOT [33] introduces an RGB-Thermal referring multi-object tracking dataset and a unified L-RGB-T framework that exploits thermal cues for robust language-guided trajectory association and identity maintenance under low-light conditions. 

2.3. Omnidirectional Perception 

Omnidirectional perception aims to understand 360° visual data, yet the widely adopted equirectangular projection (ERP) often introduces distortions. To ad-dress this issue, the Spherical Vision Transformer [34] partitions the sphere into tangent patches and applies Transformer-based long-range modeling to capture global context; OmniStereo [35] fuses multi-fisheye in-puts for real-time depth estimation; and Dense360 [36] provides semantic and geometric annotations to facil-itate scene understanding from single omnidirectional images. Progress in this field also benefits from the de-velopment of large-scale datasets and generative mod-els: Leader360V [37] offers real-world 360° videos, VideoPanda [38] introduces a diffusion-based frame-work for omnidirectional video synthesis, Matrix-3D [39] constructs explorable 3D environments from sin-gle omnidirectional views, and PanoVid [40] mitigates generation distortions through latitude-aware sampling and rotational denoising. Building upon these advances, omnidirectional multi-object tracking has emerged as a 3Step 2 : L anguage De scription Generation          

> As the image is captured using an omnidirectional
> camera, some projection distortion may occur. The
> pedestrians ’body orientations align with the paving
> direction, suggesting that they walk straight ahead.
> Several language descriptions will be generated below:
> 1. One person carrying a backpack is walk ing straight
> along the path .
> 2. ...
> Generate several factual and detailed descriptions for
> the selected keyframes , focusing on the visual content
> and semantic elements identified in ▲Step 1 .

Step 1: Semantic Content and Keyframe Selection 

...   

> All Videos All Videos
> “Appearance, Action, Position, Relationship,
> Negation, Emotion, Inferred Intention,
> Comparison, Identity, Age, Or ientation,
> Omnidirectional -Specific Descriptors ....
> ”
> Select keyframes
> Semantic content for reference
> GPT -assisted keyframe sselection GPT -assisted keyframe sselection

Step 3: Verification and Alignment Ground Truth                                         

> Visualization Annotation Example (Omnidirectional -Specific Description )
> 4, 5 ID ：4, 5 4, 5 ID ：4, 5
> 4, 5 ID ：4, 5 4, 5 ID ：4, 5
> 4, 5 ID ：4, 5 4, 5 ID ：4, 5
> 4, 5 280 -590
> frames
> 4, 5 280 -590
> frames
> 1. Two pedestrians walking straight on the sidewalk with backpacks.
> 2. People in dark clothes with backpacks are walking straight along the roadside.
> 1. Two people carrying backpack sare walking straight along the path .
> 2. Two pedestrians walking straight on the sidewalk with backpacks.
> 3. People in dark clothes with backpacks are walking straight along the roadside.
> One person carrying a backpack is walking straight along the path .
> 4, 5 ID ：4, 5 4, 5 ID ：4, 5 4, 5 ID ：4, 5
> ④Align temporal
> segments
> ③Enrich descriptions
> ②Correct descriptions
> ①Matching
> descriptions with IDs
> ④Align temporal
> segments
> ③Enrich descriptions
> ②Correct descriptions
> ①Matching
> descriptions with IDs
> Frame -diff peak detection Frame -diff peak detection
> Two people carrying backpack sare walking straight along the path .(Corrected)

Figure 2: Overview of the multi-stage language description annotation pipeline. This pipeline includes three-step: (1) Step 1 involves selecting the semantic content for reference and identifying representative keyframes through a combination of algorithmic detection and GPT-assisted refinement. (2) Step 2 leverages a large language model (GPT-4o) to generate diverse and factual descriptions based on the selected keyframes and predefined content. (3) Step 3 ensures data quality by matching each description to the corresponding person IDs in the visualized ground truth, verifying the accuracy of descriptions, enriching linguistic expressions, and aligning them with temporal segments in the video. 

key research direction. MMPAT [41] enhances object detection and trajectory inference by fusing 2D omni-directional views with 3D point clouds, while Omni-Track [42] integrates Tracklet Management with Circu-larStatE, effectively combining temporal reasoning and geometric compensation to achieve state-of-the-art per-formance on omnidirectional tracking benchmarks. 

2.4. Large Vision-Language Models 

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have evolved from vision–language alignment to multimodal reasoning. Early efforts such as CLIP [43] estab-lished image–text alignment, while recent systems in-tegrate visual encoders directly into large language models. GPT-4 [44], Gemini [45] and Claude ex-tend multimodal understanding through unified percep-tion and reasoning. The latest GPT-5 further enhances long-context reasoning with efficient multimodal fu-sion. Recent LVLMs emphasize video comprehen-sion and temporal grounding. MiniGPT-5 [46] and In-ternVL2 [47] improve multi-frame reasoning and scal-able multimodal learning. Qwen2.5-VL [5] enhances fine-grained visual grounding, while models such as LongVU [48], FlashVStream [49], Florence2 [50], Emu3 [51], and Pixtral [52] push the boundaries of effi-cient video–language modeling and instruction tuning. ChatTracker [53] leverages multimodal large language models to enhance tracking performance. 

3. Dataset 

3.1. Dataset Collection 

Our dataset is built upon the JackRabbot Dataset and Benchmark (JRDB) [4]. By employing omnidirectional capture rather than conventional forward-facing views, the JRDB dataset offers a complete and continuous ob-servation of the surrounding environment. This de-sign reduces occlusion and viewpoint bias, providing richer contextual information for scene understanding and tracking research. The original dataset provides essential spatiotemporal annotations for tracking tasks, with each frame labeled with person IDs and bounding boxes. However, it lacks the high-level semantic de-scriptions necessary for language-guided tasks, limiting its applicability to multimodal research. To address this limitation, we introduce ORSet, a new dataset featur-ing comprehensive omnidirectional language descrip-tions that capture both spatial and temporal semantics. This enhancement enables language-driven multimodal research under omnidirectional perception settings. 43.2. Dataset Annotation 

To ensure high-quality and well-aligned language de-scription annotations, we design a systematic three-stage annotation pipeline, as illustrated in Figure 2. 

Step 1: Semantic Content and Keyframe Selection. 

We systematically review all videos to determine what to describe, including each person’s appearance, move-ments or postures, spatial relationships with the envi-ronment, intentions, emotions, identities, social interac-tions, and the distinctive trajectories captured by omni-directional cameras. To locate representative segments, we adopt an algorithmic keyframe selection method based on frame-difference peak detection. Specifically, we compute frame-wise differences to measure visual changes over time and smooth the resulting signal to suppress noise. Local maxima that exceed an adap-tive threshold are selected as candidate peaks, repre-senting moments with significant motion or scene vari-ation. Consecutive peaks that are too close are merged to avoid redundancy. To further ensure that the selected moments correspond to semantically meaningful events such as direction changes or occlusions, we perform a GPT-assisted refinement that filters and adjusts these candidates based on textual and visual cues. 

Step 2: Language Description Generation. We adopt a large language model (LLM) to assist in generating textual trajectory descriptions. Specifically, we employ GPT-4o [44] to produce candidate descriptions based on sampled keyframes and manually summarized se-mantic references from Step 1 . A fixed prompt tem-plate (as shown in Figure 2, Step 2) is used to ensure consistency in language generation. Specifically, for each trajectory, the LLM generates multiple candidate descriptions focusing on the individuals and their mo-tion patterns within the scene. Subsequently, human an-notators match these descriptions with the correspond-ing ground-truth trajectory IDs visualized in the video. The descriptions are then manually refined, temporally aligned with the trajectory spans, and edited to ensure semantic accuracy and consistency across frames. 

Step 3: Verification and Alignment. After visualiz-ing the ground-truth annotations, we begin by matching each generated description with its corresponding per-son ID to establish accurate identity association. Subse-quently, we conduct a thorough verification of all de-scriptions to ensure correctness, followed by refining and enriching their linguistic expressions for clarity and coherence. Finally, each verified description is precisely aligned with its corresponding temporal segment, com-pleting the annotation process. 

Omnidirectional-Specific Descriptors. Omnidirec-tional imagery exhibits two prominent characteris-(d) Field -of -view transition marking.                                              

> Language Description: “The person leaving the room through the doorway .”
> Exiting the physical space, not
> just the limited -FoV.
> (d) Field -of -view transition marking.
> Language Description: “The person leaving the room through the doorway .”
> Exiting the physical space, not
> just the limited -FoV.
> .
> .
> .
> (a) Boundary -crossing motion.
> Language Description: “The person who disappears at the left edge and reappears at the right edge. ”
> Disappear at the left edge Reappear at the right edge
> (a) Boundary -crossing motion.
> Language Description: “The person who disappears at the left edge and reappears at the right edge. ”
> Disappear at the left edge Reappear at the right edge
> ...
> (b) Circumferential orientation cues .
> Language Description: “The person walking along the camera's three o'clock direction .”
> 360°azimuth estimation
> (b) Circumferential orientation cues .
> Language Description: “The person walking along the camera's three o'clock direction .”
> 360°azimuth estimation
> (c) P rojection -aware semantic disambiguation .
> Language Description: “The person walking straight along a road .”
> Correct the apparent road curvature caused by omnidirectional distortion
> (c) P rojection -aware semantic disambiguation .
> Language Description: “The person walking straight along a road .”
> Correct the apparent road curvature caused by omnidirectional distortion
> (c) P rojection -aware semantic disambiguation .
> Language Description: “The person walking straight along a road .”
> Correct the apparent road curvature caused by omnidirectional distortion
> ...
> ...
> ...

Figure 3: Visualization of the four omnidirectional-specific de-scriptors. (a) Boundary-crossing motion links disappearing and reap-pearing objects, resolving seam ambiguity. (b) Circumferential orien-tation cues use a 360° coordinate system for globally consistent direc-tion. (c) Projection-aware semantic disambiguation to understand real motion in scenes. (d) Field-of-view transition marking distinguishes physical exits from view limitations. 

tics: (i) full 360° field-of-view coverage, which en-ables motion and exit behaviors to be described through coordinate- and orientation-aware cues; and (ii) projection-induced distortion and stitching artifacts, which may introduce misleading visual patterns in the scene. Based on these characteristics, we categorize omnidirectional-specific descriptions into four types, as illustrated in Figure 3. In practice, these descriptors are annotated either alone or in combination, reflect over-lapping semantics in real scenes. (a) Boundary-crossing motion. When an omnidirec-tional view is unfolded, seams may cause continuous motion to appear as if an object disappears on one side and reappears on the other. We explicitly describe this phenomenon to help the model recognize it as a single continuous 3D motion (e.g., "A person disappears at the left edge and reappears at the right edge.") rather than two separate targets. (b) Circumferential orientation cues. By leveraging the 360° coordinate system of omnidirectional cameras, we can express directions precisely (e.g., "at the 12 o’clock position"). This observer- or camera-centered anchor-ing ensures globally consistent and intuitive orientation information, overcoming the ambiguity of relative ex-pressions such as "left" or "right". (c) Projection-aware semantic disambiguation. Due to omnidirectional projection, structurally continuous ele-5Table 1: Statistics of the ORSet dataset. 

Statistic Value 

Video Scenes 27 Total BBoxes 2.9 M Language Descriptions 848 Omnidirectional-specific Descriptions 175 Average Frames per Description 575.3 Average Description Length 8.2 words Camera State (Static / Moving) 13 / 14 Image Size 3760 × 480 

ments in the real world (e.g., roads or building edges) may appear curved or stretched in the panoramic im-age. During the annotation process, we leverage envi-ronmental geometric cues, such as lane markings and shadow directions, to help annotators infer the true mo-tion direction of targets. These cues are used to guide semantic interpretation during annotation. The original images remain unchanged throughout the process. (d) Field-of-view transition marking. In omnidirec-tional scenes, objects may enter or exit the 360° field of view from any direction. We explicitly annotate such events (e.g., "A person leaving the room through the doorway.") to help the model build a coherent under-standing of scene dynamics. 

3.3. Dataset Split 

To strike a balance between providing sufficient data for model learning and retaining an adequate number of unseen samples for robust performance evaluation, we split all video sequences in the ORSet dataset into train-ing and test sets at a 6:4 ratio. Language descriptions, person identities, and location information are all tied to the video sequences and are accordingly assigned to the corresponding subsets. This results in a training set con-taining 17 different omnidirectional scenes and a test set comprising 10 diverse omnidirectional scenes. 

3.4. Dataset Statistics 

The detailed statistics of our ORSet dataset are sum-marized in Table 1, and the annotation format is illus-trated in Listing 1. Other statistical data are as follows: 

3.4.1. Word Cloud 

As illustrated in Figure 4 (a), the word cloud visual-izes the lexical distribution of language descriptions in the dataset. Prominent terms such as "wearing", "edge", "hand", "black", "camera", and "walking" stand out, with words related to appearance (e.g., "black", "shirt",                                

> Listing 1: Annotation format of the ORSet dataset.
> {"scene_id": "bytes-cafe-2019-02-07_0", "frame_range": {[120, 450], [600, 860] }, "annotations": {"120": [{"id": 3, "bbox": [x1, y1, x2, y2]} ], "121": [{"id": 3, "bbox": [x1, y1, x2, y2]}, {"id": 8, "bbox": [x1, y1, x2, y2]} ], ... }, "description": "The person who orders food." }

"shoes", "clothes") and action (e.g., "walking", "carry-ing", "holding") appearing frequently. These two cat-egories represent common features used in daily life to describe people, making the annotations highly intu-itive and aligned with human cognitive habits. Notably, the high frequency of "edge" results from the inclusion of Omnidirectional-Specific Descriptors in our dataset, which capture the unique characteristics of omnidirec-tional imagery and highlight the dataset’s novelty and distinction from general vision–language datasets. 

3.4.2. Distribution of Language Description Types 

The dataset contains diverse description types, which we categorize into three main groups: Appearance, Ac-tion, and Omnidirectional-specific descriptors, as de-picted in Figure 4 (b).The three main categories are: Appearance (332), Action (182), and Omnidirectional-specific descriptors (46), where the numbers repre-sent the count of descriptions belonging solely to these types. Additionally, descriptions that combine these three categories are also counted, as indicated by the "+" nodes in the figure.Each main category is asso-ciated with multiple related sub-types; for example, Omnidirectional-specific descriptors include unique as-pects like Edge, relative perspective, FoV, and distor-tion correction. The "Shared and Cross-listed Cate-gories" node, within the "Others" branch, indicates that many sub-categories (e.g., emotion) are not confined to a single main category and can also form descrip-tions independently. This pattern aligns with real-world commands, which typically integrate multiple attributes rather than relying on a single feature, thereby high-lighting the dataset’s potential to support research on complex language–vision alignment. 6(a) Word Cloud. Action  

> (182)
> (182)
> Others
> Appearance +Action
> +Omnidirectional -
> specific descriptors
> Appearance +
> Omnidirectional -
> specific descriptors
> Edge
> Relative
> Perspective
> FoV
> Distortion
> Correction
> Comparison
> Age
> Negation
> Emotion
> Inferred Intention
> Appearance+Action
> Position
> Inferred Intention
> Orientation
> Emotion
> Relationship
> Shared &
> Cross -listed
> Categories
> Rotational
> Motion
> Identity
> Action+ Omnidirectional -
> specific descriptors
> Omnidirectional
> Language
> Description s
> +(11)
> +(18)
> +(41)
> ++(36)

(b) Distribution of Description Types. 0-200 200-400 400-600 600-800 800-1000 1000-1200 1200-1400 1400-1600 1600-1800 Number of Frames in Language Descriptions 050 100 150 200 250 Number of Language Descriptions (c) Distribution of Track Lengths. 0-20 20-40 40-60 60-80 80-100 100-120 120-140 Length of the Language Description Sentence 0100 200 300 400 500 Number of Language Descriptions 

(d) Distribution of Language Descrip-tion Lengths. 

Figure 4: Overview of the ORSet dataset statistics. (a) Word Cloud: Frequent terms primarily cover appearance (e.g., "wearing", "black"), actions (e.g., "walking"), and omnidirectional-specific cues (e.g., "edge"). The vocabulary’s diversity indicates that the annotations are rich and cover multifaceted information, while terms like "edge" reflect the unique properties of omnidirectional imagery. (b) Distribution of Language Description Types: Descriptions are mainly categorized into appearance, action, and omnidirectional-specific descriptors. Most descriptions are compositional, blending multiple attributes. (c) Distribution of Language Description Lengths: The majority of descriptions are concentrated in the 20-80 character range, suggesting the annotation language description is concise. (d) Distribution of Track Lengths: The dataset provides balanced coverage across short- and long-term tracks, supporting comprehensive temporal reasoning for long-horizon language descriptions. 

3.4.3. Distribution of Language Description Lengths 

We analyze the length of language descriptions in terms of the number of characters, as shown in Figure 4 (c). The results reveal that most descriptions fall within a moderate range, primarily between 20 and 80 charac-ters, while a smaller portion extends beyond 100 char-acters. This distribution suggests that the dataset con-tains both concise and relatively detailed expressions, reflecting natural variability in human descriptions. Im-portantly, the dominance of short-to-medium sentences indicates that the annotations are consistent with every-day spoken language habits, where expressions tend to be succinct and focused on key observable events. Such language characteristics make the dataset well-suited for studying natural and coherent language generation aligned with visual content. 

3.4.4. Distribution of Track Lengths 

To examine the temporal span of the language de-scriptions in the ORSet dataset, we calculate the number of frames covered by each description, which reflects the trajectory length of the described event. As shown in Figure 4 (d), most descriptions correspond to short se-quences within 0–200 frames, followed by a gradual de-crease as the frame range increases. Medium-length de-scriptions (200–1000 frames) maintain a moderate pres-ence, while long sequences exceeding 1000 frames are relatively rare. This long-tailed distribution indicates that the dataset predominantly contains concise, observ-able actions, yet still includes a sufficient number of long-duration cases, which is particularly beneficial for the Omnidirectional Referring Multi-Object Tracking setting. Such a composition provides a balanced cover-age of both short-term and long-term temporal contexts, supporting fine-grained temporal grounding and robust vision-language alignment. 

4. Methodology 

4.1. Overview 

We propose ORTrack, an Omnidirectional Referring Multi-Object Tracking framework that leverages the open-vocabulary reasoning capability of large vision-language models (LVLMs) to detect and associate mul-tiple referred objects in omnidirectional scenes. Un-like conventional detectors trained on fixed taxonomies, our method allows arbitrary language queries to guide multi-object tracking in complex and omnidirectional environments. Given a sequence of omnidirectional frames {It}Tt=1 and a language description L, ORTrack produces a set of trajectories T = {τk}Kk=1, where each 

τk = nbkt

ote

t=ts

represents a continuous tracklet corre-sponding to a language-referred target. The pipeline of our ORTrack framework is shown in Figure 5. 

4.2. Language-guided Detection via LVLM 

Omnidirectional environments cover 360° fields of view, often containing multiple entities with varying appearances and scales. Conventional detectors suffer from limited predefined classes and lack flexibility to respond to language descriptions. To address this, OR-Track employs an LVLM-based detection mechanism that integrates visual grounding and semantic under-standing in a unified reasoning process. Given a frame 

It and a text instruction L, the LVLM (e.g., Qwen2.5-VL [5], InternVL3.5 [54]) internally performs: (1). Visual encoding: ψv (It) to obtain visual tokens. (2). Language encoding: ψl (L) to represent the instruction. (3). Multi-modal cross-attention reasoning to align language with visual regions. (4). Bounding box prediction for the referred targets. Formally: 

nbit

oNt

i=1 = LVLM ( It, L) = Align ( ψv (It) , ψ l(L)) (1) 7Cross -frame Association                       

> Language Description
> Large Vision -Language Model (LVLM)
> Detection Boxes Final F eature s
> CLIP
> :AND :Crop Operation
> Global Cropped Regions
> Local Cropped Regions CLIP
> Trajector ies
> Global Feature s
> Local Feature s
> Global Feature s
> Local Feature s
> C
> CFigure 5: Pipeline of ORTrack. It comprises three components: (1) Language-guided detection via LVLM: Using a Large Vision-Language Model (LVLM) as an open-vocabulary detector to output bounding boxes conditioned on the language description. (2) Two-stage cropping-based feature extraction: Hierarchical region extraction and feature encoding to obtain discriminative features. (3) Cross-frame association: Linking detected boxes via cosine similarity and Hungarian matching to maintain consistent object identities.

where bit = xit, yit, wit, hit

 represents the bounding box of the i-th referred object. 

4.3. Two-stage Cropping-based Feature Extraction 

Following LVLM-based detection, ORTrack per-forms two-stage cropping-based inference to obtain ro-bust object features, effectively balancing global con-textual cues and local discriminative details. Given that omnidirectional images are represented in an equirect-angular projection, where objects may extend from the leftmost to the rightmost boundaries, IoU-based match-ing becomes unreliable. Therefore, ORTrack employs a feature-based association strategy to maintain consis-tent identities across the omnidirectional view. 

Stage 1: Global Contextual Cropping. Omnidirec-tional frames often suffer from wide-angle compression, which can destabilize local features. To mitigate this ef-fect, each detected box is expanded by a margin ratio α

to incorporate surrounding contextual information: 

Ii, global  

> t

= Crop It, α bit

 (2) where Ii, global  

> t

represents the global cropped region of the i-th referred object. The "Crop( ·)" represents the cropping operation. It represents the frame. α repre-sents the margin ratio. 

Stage 2: Fine-grained Target Cropping. The second-stage crop extracts the exact target region Ii, local  

> t

, de-fined by the detected bounding box bit.

Ii, local  

> t

= Crop It, bit

 (3) where Ii, local  

> t

represents the local cropped region of the 

i-th referred object. The "Crop( ·)" denotes the cropping operation. It denotes the frame. Both global and local regions are processed by a frozen CLIP [43] visual encoder to generate features: 

fit, global = ϕg

Ii, global 

> t

 (4) 

fit, local = ϕl

Ii, local 

> t

 (5) where fit, global represents the global feature of the i-th referred object. fit, local represents the local feature of the 

i-th referred object. ϕ denotes the CLIP visual encoder. The final object feature is computed as follows: 

fit = fit, local + λfit, global (6) where fit represents the feature of the i-th referred object. 

λ represents the feature fusion weight of fit, global .

4.4. Cross-frame Association 

To maintain identity consistency, ORTrack adopts cosine-similarity-based matching followed by Hungar-ian algorithm. Specifically, given two consecutive frames t and t + 1, we compute the pairwise cosine sim-ilarity between all detected objects to construct a simi-larity matrix. Formally, 

S i j = fit · f jt+1

fit f jt+1

(7) where fit and fit+1 denote the visual embeddings of the 

i-th and j-th objects in frames t and t + 1, respectively. The corresponding cost matrix is defined as Ci j =

1 − S i j , which is used to find the optimal one-to-one assignment via Hungarian algorithm [6]: 

min 

> X

X 

> i,j

Ci j Xi j , s.t. Xi j ∈ { 0, 1}. (8) where Xi j = 1 indicates that detection j in frame t + 1 is assigned to track i in frame t.This process ensures consistent identity propagation across frames while minimizing the overall association cost. Unmatched detections initiate new tracklets, while tracks without matches for τmax frames are terminated. 8Table 2: Performance of different methods on the test set of the ORSet dataset under zero-shot conditions. ↑ indicates that higher score is better. The best results are marked in bold .

Method Published HOTA ↑ DetA ↑ AssA ↑ DetRe ↑ DetPr ↑ AssRe ↑ AssPr ↑ LocA ↑

TransRMOT [3] CVPR 2023 2.41 1.40 4.24 1.56 12.10 4.29 79.29 75.05 TempRMOT [26] ArXiv 2024 2.00 0.45 9.01 0.47 11.01 9.44 80.93 78.88 

ORTrack (Ours) - 9.97 6.37 16.15 9.20 16.69 17.35 61.80 79.68                                                                  

> Table 3: Ablation study of our ORTrack framework on the test set of the ORSet dataset under zero-shot conditions. The number in the first column indicates the row number. ↑indicates that higher score is better. The best results are marked in bold .
> Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) Metrics Name Size HOTA ↑DetA ↑AssA ↑DetRe ↑DetPr ↑AssRe ↑AssPr ↑LocA ↑
> 1DeepSeek-VL [55] 7B 0.12 0.06 0.29 0.06 2.83 0.30 17.89 66.66 2LLaVA-NEXT [56] 8B 1.76 1.11 3.12 1.55 3.35 3.80 16.22 57.57 3InternVL3.5 [54] 8B 0.55 0.49 0.72 0.52 6.93 0.74 39.48 61.56 4Qwen2.5-VL [5] 7B 9.97 6.37 16.15 9.20 16.69 17.35 61.80 79.68
> 5Qwen2.5-VL [5] 3B 3.33 2.13 5.84 2.72 8.54 6.08 52.44 71.34

5. Experiments 

5.1. Metrics 

We follow the standard evaluation metrics [3] to evaluate our method. Specifically, the following met-rics are employed: Higher Order Tracking Accuracy (HOTA), Detection Accuracy (DetA), Association Ac-curacy (AssA), Detection Recall (DetRe), Precision (DetPr), Association Recall (AssRe), Precision (AssPr), and Localization Accuracy (LocA), which jointly and comprehensively assess the detection accuracy, associa-tion consistency, and localization precision of the over-all tracking performance. 

5.2. Implementation Details 

Our ORTrack framework is built upon large vision-language models (LVLMs) and CLIP. Specifically, we adopt Qwen2.5-VL-7B [5] as the large vision-language model (LVLM) backbone and CLIP-ViT-B-32 [43] as the CLIP encoder. The margin ratio α in Equation (2) is set to 1.2, and the feature fusion weight λ in Equa-tion (6) is set to 0.5. All experiments are conducted on a single NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU. To ensure a fair evaluation of different large vision-language models (LVLMs) within the ORTrack frame-work, we unify the prompt construction strategy across all models while allowing minor adaptations to accom-modate their respective instruction formats. Given a language description (e.g., "The person carrying a bag pushed open the door and walked out of the field of view."), each LVLM is asked to detect all targets that match the language description. For DeepSeek-VL-7B [55], LLaVA-NEXT-8B [56], and InternVL3.5-8B [54], we employ a structured detection-oriented prompt that asks the model to "Please detect all {description} in the image and output their coordinates in the [x1, y1, x2, y2] format.". For the Qwen2.5-VL series (7B and 3B) [5], whose instruction style emphasizes explicit label-ing, the prompts ask the model to "Please detect and label all {description} in the following image and mark their positions.". This unified yet model-aware prompt design ensures that each LVLM performs the referring detection, enabling consistent cross-model comparison and reliable integration into the ORTrack framework. 

5.3. Quantitative Results 

We conduct a comparative evaluation of our ORTrack framework against existing methods on the ORSet dataset under zero-shot conditions. It is worth noting that only open-source RMOT methods are included for fair comparison. As shown in Table 2, the proposed ORTrack consistently outperforms prior works across most evaluation metrics, achieving the best overall per-formance. In particular, ORTrack attains a substantial improvement in HOTA (9.97 vs. 2.41/2.00), DetA (6.37 vs. 1.40/0.45), and AssA (16.15 vs. 4.24/9.01), indicat-ing enhanced detection robustness and association sta-bility. Moreover, its balanced gains in both DetPr/AssPr and DetRe/AssRe demonstrate strong identity preserva-tion and recall capability, even without fine-tuning on the dataset. These results highlight the remarkable zero-9Table 4: Efficiency and performance of different feature encoder. ↑ indicates that higher score is better. ↓ indicates that lower score is better. The best results are marked in bold .

Method Feature Efficiency Metrics 

Encoder Dims FPS ↑ FLOPs ↓ HOTA ↑ DetA ↑ AssA ↑ DetRe ↑ DetPr ↑ AssRe ↑ AssPr ↑ LocA ↑

w/o CLIP LVLM 3584 0.399 4.193 ×10 13 10.05 6.37 16.42 9.20 16.68 17.65 61.74 79.68 

ORTrack (Ours) CLIP 512 0.446 4.194 ×10 13 9.97 6.37 16.15 9.20 16.69 17.35 61.80 79.68     

> Table 5: Performance of different association strategies on the ORSet dataset. ↑indicates that higher score is better. The best results are marked in bold .

Method HOTA ↑ DetA ↑ AssA ↑ DetRe ↑ DetPr ↑ AssRe ↑ AssPr ↑ LocA ↑

LVLM + OC-SORT [10] 5.05 2.56 10.19 2.83 20.76 10.66 73.04 80.70 

ORTrack (Ours) 9.97 6.37 16.15 9.20 16.69 17.35 61.80 79.68 shot generalization capacity and powerful tracking per-formance of our ORTrack framework. 

5.4. Ablation Study 

To assess the effectiveness of the proposed ORTrack framework, we conduct some ablation experiments on the test set of the ORSet dataset. 

5.5. Analysis of Large Vision-Language Models 

To investigate the effect of different large vision-language models (LVLMs) on the ORTrack framework, we evaluate several LVLMs of comparable scale to Qwen2.5-VL on the ORSet dataset. As shown in Ta-ble 3, under zero-shot conditions, ORTrack equipped with Qwen2.5-VL-7B (row 4) achieves the best overall performance across all evaluation metrics, surpassing other LVLMs such as DeepSeek-VL (row 1), LLaVA-NEXT (row 2), and InternVL3.5 (row 3). Moreover, compared to its smaller counterpart Qwen2.5-VL-3B (row 5), the 7B model exhibits a substantial perfor-mance gain, demonstrating that a larger model size with stronger reasoning and visual-language alignment ca-pabilities leads to more accurate and robust language-guided tracking. These results collectively confirm that the selection and capacity of the LVLM play a deci-sive role in determining the zero-shot generalization and overall effectiveness of the ORTrack framework. 

5.6. Analysis of CLIP vs LVLM for Feature Encoder 

As shown in Table 4, choosing between CLIP [43] and LVLM as a feature encoder involves a trade-off be-tween accuracy and computational efficiency. LVLM-based feature encoder achieves slightly higher accu-racy due to its higher-dimensional feature representa-tions, but this increased dimensionality leads to signif-icant computational overhead, especially during simi-larity computations. In contrast, CLIP provides a more computationally efficient solution. Although it offers slightly lower accuracy compared to LVLM, its lower-dimensional feature representations allow for faster pro-cessing, resulting in higher FPS and better real-time per-formance, achieving higher overall efficiency. 

5.7. Analysis of Different Association Strategies 

As shown in Table 5, we conduct an ablation study to compare ORTrack with LVLM + OC-SORT, where both methods use LVLM as the object detector, but ORTrack employs a different association strategy than OC-SORT [10]. The results reveal that ORTrack significantly out-performs LVLM + OC-SORT across all metrics. Specif-ically, ORTrack achieves a substantial improvement in HOTA (9.97 vs. 5.05) and Assignment Accuracy (16.15 vs. 10.19), indicating that ORTrack’s association strat-egy is more effective in matching objects across frames. Furthermore, ORTrack exhibits higher Detection Ac-curacy (6.37 vs. 2.56) and Detection Recall (9.20 vs. 2.83), demonstrating that its approach to object track-ing leads to more accurate and consistent detections. Although Localization Accuracy is similar between the two methods (79.68 vs. 80.70), ORTrack outperforms OC-SORT in Assignment Recall (17.35 vs. 10.66), highlighting the superior precision of ORTrack’s asso-ciation strategy. Overall, this ablation study confirms that ORTrack’s association approach provides notable improvements in tracking performance, even when us-ing the same detector as OC-SORT. 10 Language Description: The person skateboarding along a straight road . Result : Track [ID=3] 

Result : Track [ID=12] Language Description: Language Description : The person entering the field of vision. 

Language Description: The person wearing grayish -white trousers. Result : Track [ID=1, 2] Figure 6: Qualitative results (Part 1) of our ORTrack framework on the test set of the ORSet dataset under zero-shot conditions. 

11 Language Description: The person who puts the thing in their hand on the ground, takes a 

photo with their phone, and then picks it up again . Result : Track [ID=1] 

Language Description: People riding bicycles . Result : Track [ID=2, 10] 

Result : Track [ID=1] Language Description: The person who is happy and looking forward to it, waiting for others to ask .Figure 7: Qualitative results (Part 2) of our ORTrack framework on the test set of the ORSet dataset under zero-shot conditions. 

12 Language Description: The person walking forward along the 12 o 'clock direction 

of the camera . Ground Truth : Track [ID=20, 32] 

Language Description: The person who disappears from the left edge and reappears from 

the right edge. Ground Truth : Track [ID=1, 6] 

Ground Truth : Track [ID=14, 20] Language Description: The person who leaves the field of view .

16 16

16 16

61 61          

> 20 14
> 20 14
> 20
> 14
> 20
> 14
> 20 14 14
> 20 14
> 32 32 20 20
> 32 20
> 32 32 20 20 32 20
> 32 32 20 20 32 20

Figure 8: Representative examples (Part 1) of language descriptions and ground truth in the ORSet dataset, featuring omnidirectional-specific descriptors. 

13 Language Description: The person dressed in black, holding a cup in his hand, 

walked straight along the bushes together . Ground Truth : Track [ID=16, 17] 

Ground Truth : Track [ID=39] 

Language Description: The waiter in a black apron walks from the right side of 

the picture to the left in front of the camera .        

> 1
> 39 39
> 39 39
> 39 39
> 16 17 16 17 16 17
> 16 17
> 16 17
> 16 17
> 16
> 17 16
> 17 16
> 17

Language Description: Because the camera moves the people who repeatedly 

appear on the left and right edges . Ground Truth : Track [ID=0, 1]  

> 0
> 01
> 10

Language Description: Because the camera moves the people who repeatedly 

appear on the left and right edges . Ground Truth : Track [ID=0, 1]  

> 0
> 01
> 10
> 1

Figure 9: Representative examples (Part 2) of language descriptions and ground truth in the ORSet dataset, featuring omnidirectional-specific descriptors. 

14 5.8. Qualitative Results of the ORTrack Framework 

To further validate the effectiveness of the proposed ORTrack framework, we visualize more results of our ORTrack framework on the test set of the ORSet dataset under zero-shot conditions. Qualitative results are shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7. We find that our OR-Track framework shows zero-shot capability. For example, in the first example in Figure 6, the road in the image is distorted from straight to curved due to omnidirectional projection, but according to the description "The person skateboarding along a straight road." the target can still be tracked correctly. More-over, in the last example of Figure 7, for the language description "The person who is happy and looking for-ward to it, waiting for others to ask.", this is a highly difficult emotion inference task. Although emotion is a subtle and subjective state, the model accurately tracks the target exhibiting the corresponding facial expression or body language. In summary, ORTrack demonstrates the ability to as-sociate language descriptions with corresponding tar-gets and maintain trajectory tracking under omnidirec-tional settings. 

5.9. Language Descriptions and Ground Truth in the ORSet dataset 

The ORSet dataset contains a large number of lan-guage descriptions that are specific to omnidirectional scenes, reflecting the distinctive properties of 360° vi-sual perception. These descriptions often incorporate inference cues that only arise in omnidirectional envi-ronments, such as boundary-crossing behaviors, long-horizon motion paths, and viewpoint-dependent appear-ance changes. Figure 8 and Figure 9 show several omnidirectional-specific challenges. For example, in the second case of Figure 8, the language description "The person who disappears from the left edge and reappears from the right edge." explicitly captures the boundary-crossing motion inherent to 360° videos, where a target seam-lessly transitions across opposite edges of the equirect-angular frame. The last example in Figure 9, with the description "The moving waiter wearing a black apron." demonstrates a challenging long-horizon tracking sce-nario. The omnidirectional camera captures the target’s full extended trajectory (Track ID 39). This case re-quires the model to overcome two hurdles: maintaining identity continuity despite pose and orientation shifts, and using role-based inference to correctly identify the target’s professional role. Language Description: The person carrying a backpack on both shoulders .           

> Language Description: The person who walks straight.
> (a) Case 1: Detection Failure .(False detections and m issed detections )
> (b) Case 2: Association Failure .(Target identity switches )
> Frame 20
> Frame 38
> Frame 40
> Frame 42
> Frame 60
> Frame 80
> Figure 10: Representative Failure Cases of ORMOT.

Overall, The ORSet dataset contains numerous de-scriptions that arise from omnidirectional viewing con-ditions, verifing the dataset’s richness, realism, and its unique alignment with 360° scene understanding. 

5.10. Failure Case Analysis 

Representative failure cases are presented in Fig-ure 10 to illustrate the practical challenges of ORMOT under real-world conditions. In Case 1 (Detection Failure), shown in part (a), the system struggles with false detections and missed de-tections, which are common issues in omnidirectional video tracking. For instance, in Frame 60, the system incorrectly assigns an ID to a false detection, while in Frame 80, a person carrying a backpack is missed en-tirely. These issues are exacerbated by the distortion inherent to omnidirectional projections, where the tar-get can be distorted due to changes in the field-of-view (FoV), leading to inaccurate tracking. In Case 2 (Association Failure), depicted in part (b), the challenge shifts to target identity switches. As shown in the sequence from Frame 20 to Frame 42, the system incorrectly assigns multiple IDs to the same per-son, especially when a person is moving in close prox-imity, leading to identity switches. This issue is aggra-vated by close-range motion, where rapid scale changes and feature drift make it difficult for the model to main-tain accurate identity tracking across frames. Such iden-tity switches are critical problems for long-term track-ing in dynamic environments, where maintaining con-sistent associations is crucial. 15 This trend of detection and association challenges is also reflected in Table 5, where Detection Accuracy (DetA) is generally lower than Assignment Accuracy (AssA) across evaluated methods. The disparity be-tween these metrics highlights the difficulty of achiev-ing both accurate detections and stable associations, particularly in complex and rapidly changing omnidi-rectional environments. 

6. Conclusion and Future Work 

In this work, we propose a novel task, called Om-nidirectional Referring Multi-Object Tracking (OR-MOT) , which extends RMOT to omnidirectional im-agery. This setting not only alleviates the field-of-view (FoV) limitation of conventional cameras but also im-proves the model’s ability to understand long-horizon language descriptions. To advance the research on the ORMOT task, we construct ORSet , an Omnidirectional Referring Multi-Object Tracking dataset, including 27 different omnidirectional scenes, 848 language descrip-tions, and 3,401 annotated objects. Furthermore, we propose ORTrack , a Large Vision-Language Model-driven framework tailored for the ORMOT task. We evaluate the ORTrack framework on the ORSet dataset, which achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance, providing a baseline for the ORMOT task. Future work should focus on two main aspects: first, improving robust detection under omnidirectional dis-tortion; and second, enhancing stable association under severe geometric distortions, such as those caused by target motion and scale variation. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the National Natural Sci-ence Foundation of China (Grant 62576144). 

References 

[1] W. Meng, S. Duan, S. Ma, B. Hu, Motion-perception multi-object tracking (mpmot): En-hancing multi-object tracking performance via motion-aware data association and trajectory con-nection, Journal of Imaging 11 (5) (2025) 144. [2] Z. Guan, Z. Wang, G. Zhang, L. Li, M. Zhang, Z. Shi, N. Jiang, Multi-object tracking review: ret-rospective and emerging trend, Artificial Intelli-gence Review 58 (8) (2025) 235. [3] D. Wu, W. Han, T. Wang, X. Dong, X. Zhang, J. Shen, Referring multi-object tracking, in: Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on com-puter vision and pattern recognition, 2023, pp. 14633–14642. [4] R. Martín-Martín, H. Rezatofighi, A. Shenoi, M. Patel, J. Gwak, N. Dass, A. Federman, P. Goebel, S. Savarese, Jrdb: A dataset and bench-mark for visual perception for navigation in human environments, arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.11792 (2019). [5] S. Bai, K. Chen, X. Liu, J. Wang, W. Ge, S. Song, K. Dang, P. Wang, S. Wang, J. Tang, et al., Qwen2. 5-vl technical report, arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 (2025). [6] H. W. Kuhn, The hungarian method for the assign-ment problem, Naval research logistics quarterly 2 (1-2) (1955) 83–97. [7] A. Bewley, Z. Ge, L. Ott, F. Ramos, B. Upcroft, Simple online and realtime tracking, in: 2016 IEEE international conference on image process-ing (ICIP), IEEE, 2016, pp. 3464–3468. [8] N. Wojke, A. Bewley, D. Paulus, Simple online and realtime tracking with a deep association met-ric, in: 2017 IEEE international conference on image processing (ICIP), IEEE, 2017, pp. 3645– 3649. [9] Y. Zhang, P. Sun, Y. Jiang, D. Yu, F. Weng, Z. Yuan, P. Luo, W. Liu, X. Wang, Bytetrack: Multi-object tracking by associating every detec-tion box, in: European Conference on Computer Vision, Springer, 2022, pp. 1–21. [10] J. Cao, J. Pang, X. Weng, R. Khirodkar, K. Ki-tani, Observation-centric sort: Rethinking sort for robust multi-object tracking, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2023, pp. 9686–9696. [11] Y. Du, Z. Zhao, Y. Song, Y. Zhao, F. Su, T. Gong, H. Meng, Strongsort: Make deepsort great again, IEEE Transactions on Multimedia (2023). [12] Z. Wang, L. Zheng, Y. Liu, S. Wang, Towards real-time multi-object tracking, The European Confer-ence on Computer Vision (ECCV) (2020). [13] X. Zhou, V. Koltun, P. Krähenbühl, Tracking ob-jects as points, in: European conference on com-puter vision, Springer, 2020, pp. 474–490. 16 [14] Y. Zhang, C. Wang, X. Wang, W. Zeng, W. Liu, Fairmot: On the fairness of detection and re-identification in multiple object tracking, Inter-national journal of computer vision 129 (2021) 3069–3087. [15] E. Yu, Z. Li, S. Han, H. Wang, Relationtrack: Relation-aware multiple object tracking with de-coupled representation, IEEE Transactions on Multimedia (2022). [16] S. Hao, P. Liu, Y. Zhan, K. Jin, Z. Liu, M. Song, J.-N. Hwang, G. Wang, Divotrack: A novel dataset and baseline method for cross-view multi-object tracking in diverse open scenes, International Jour-nal of Computer Vision 132 (4) (2024) 1075– 1090. [17] S. Chen, E. Yu, J. Li, W. Tao, Delving into the tra-jectory long-tail distribution for muti-object track-ing, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 19341–19351. [18] P. Sun, J. Cao, Y. Jiang, R. Zhang, E. Xie, Z. Yuan, C. Wang, P. Luo, Transtrack: Multiple object tracking with transformer, arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15460 (2020). [19] T. Meinhardt, A. Kirillov, L. Leal-Taixe, C. Feicht-enhofer, Trackformer: Multi-object tracking with transformers, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recog-nition, 2022, pp. 8844–8854. [20] E. Yu, Z. Li, S. Han, Towards discriminative repre-sentation: Multi-view trajectory contrastive learn-ing for online multi-object tracking, in: Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 8834– 8843. [21] F. Zeng, B. Dong, Y. Zhang, T. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Wei, Motr: End-to-end multiple-object track-ing with transformer, in: European Conference on Computer Vision, Springer, 2022, pp. 659–675. [22] E. Yu, T. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, W. Tao, Motrv3: Release-fetch supervision for end-to-end multi-object tracking, arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14298 (2023). [23] S. Li, L. Ke, M. Danelljan, L. Piccinelli, M. Segu, L. Van Gool, F. Yu, Matching anything by segmenting anything, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 18963–18973. [24] J. Li, E. Yu, S. Chen, W. Tao, Ovtr: End-to-end open-vocabulary multiple object tracking with transformer, arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10616 (2025). [25] R. Gao, J. Qi, L. Wang, Multiple object tracking as id prediction, in: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 27883–27893. [26] Y. Zhang, D. Wu, W. Han, X. Dong, Boot-strapping referring multi-object tracking, arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05039 (2024). [27] W. Li, B. Li, J. Wang, W. Meng, J. Zhang, X. Zhang, Romot: Referring-expression-comprehension open-set multi-object tracking, The Visual Computer 41 (4) (2025) 2425–2437. [28] Y. Du, C. Lei, Z. Zhao, F. Su, ikun: Speak to trackers without retraining, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 19135–19144. [29] T. Chamiti, L. Di Bella, A. Munteanu, N. Deli-giannis, Refergpt: Towards zero-shot refer-ring multi-object tracking, arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.09195 (2025). [30] S. Liang, R. Guan, W. Lian, D. Liu, X. Sun, D. Wu, Y. Yue, W. Ding, H. Xiong, Cognitive dis-entanglement for referring multi-object tracking, Information Fusion (2025) 103349. [31] S. Chen, E. Yu, W. Tao, Cross-view refer-ring multi-object tracking, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 39, 2025, pp. 2204–2211. [32] S. Chen, L. Ma, Y. Yu, E. Yu, L. Liu, W. Tao, Drmot: A dataset and framework for rgbd referring multi-object tracking, arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.04692 (2026). [33] Y. Yu, Z. Jin, S. Chen, T. Chu, E. Yu, L. Liu, W. Tao, Rt-rmot: A dataset and framework for rgb-thermal referring multi-object tracking, arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.22033 (2026). [34] M. Cokelek, H. Ozsoy, N. Imamoglu, C. Ozcinar, I. Ayhan, E. Erdem, A. Erdem, Spherical vision transformers for audio-visual saliency prediction in 360 ◦ videos, IEEE transactions on pattern anal-ysis and machine intelligence (2025). 17 [35] J. Deng, Y. Wang, H. Meng, Z. Hou, Y. Chang, G. Chen, Omnistereo: Real-time omnidireactional depth estimation with multiview fisheye cameras, in: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 1003– 1012. [36] Y. Zhou, T. Zhang, D. Zhang, S. Ji, X. Li, L. Qi, Dense360: Dense understanding from omnidirectional panoramas, arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14471 (2025). [37] W. Zhang, D. Xiao, A. Dai, Y. Liu, T. Pan, S. Wen, L. Chen, L. Wang, Leader360v: The large-scale, real-world 360 video dataset for multi-task learning in diverse environment, arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14271 (2025). [38] K. Xie, A. Sabour, J. Huang, D. Paschalidou, G. Klar, U. Iqbal, S. Fidler, X. Zeng, Videopanda: Video panoramic diffusion with multi-view atten-tion, arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.11389 (2025). [39] Z. Yang, W. Ge, Y. Li, J. Chen, H. Li, M. An, F. Kang, H. Xue, B. Xu, Y. Yin, et al., Matrix-3d: Omnidirectional explorable 3d world generation, arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.08086 (2025). [40] Y. Xia, S. Weng, S. Yang, J. Liu, C. Zhu, M. Teng, Z. Jia, H. Jiang, B. Shi, Panowan: Lifting dif-fusion video generation models to 360 {\ deg }

with latitude/longitude-aware mechanisms, arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22016 (2025). [41] Y. He, W. Yu, J. Han, X. Wei, X. Hong, Y. Gong, Know your surroundings: Panoramic multi-object tracking by multimodality collaboration, in: Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp. 2969–2980. [42] K. Luo, H. Shi, S. Wu, F. Teng, M. Duan, C. Huang, Y. Wang, K. Wang, K. Yang, Omni-directional multi-object tracking, in: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 21959–21969. [43] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, et al., Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, in: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, 2021, pp. 8748–8763. [44] J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya, F. L. Aleman, D. Almeida, J. Al-tenschmidt, S. Altman, S. Anadkat, et al., Gpt-4 technical report, arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 (2023). [45] G. Team, R. Anil, S. Borgeaud, J.-B. Alayrac, J. Yu, R. Soricut, J. Schalkwyk, A. M. Dai, A. Hauth, K. Millican, et al., Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models, arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 (2023). [46] K. Zheng, X. He, X. E. Wang, Minigpt-5: In-terleaved vision-and-language generation via gen-erative vokens, arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02239 (2023). [47] O. Team, Internvl2: Better than the best—expanding performance boundaries of open-source multimodal models with the progres-sive scaling strategy (2024). [48] X. Shen, Y. Xiong, C. Zhao, L. Wu, J. Chen, C. Zhu, Z. Liu, F. Xiao, B. Varadarajan, F. Bordes, et al., Longvu: Spatiotemporal adaptive compres-sion for long video-language understanding, arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.17434 (2024). [49] H. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Tang, Y. Liu, J. Feng, J. Dai, X. Jin, Flash-vstream: Memory-based real-time understanding for long video streams, arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08085 (2024). [50] B. Xiao, H. Wu, W. Xu, X. Dai, H. Hu, Y. Lu, M. Zeng, C. Liu, L. Yuan, Florence-2: Advanc-ing a unified representation for a variety of vision tasks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 4818–4829. [51] X. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Luo, Q. Sun, Y. Cui, J. Wang, F. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Li, Q. Yu, et al., Emu3: Next-token prediction is all you need, arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.18869 (2024). [52] P. Agrawal, S. Antoniak, E. B. Hanna, B. Bout, D. Chaplot, J. Chudnovsky, D. Costa, B. De Mon-icault, S. Garg, T. Gervet, et al., Pixtral 12b, arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07073 (2024). [53] Y. Sun, F. Yu, S. Chen, Y. Zhang, J. Huang, Y. Li, C. Li, C. Wang, Chattracker: Enhanc-ing visual tracking performance via chatting with multimodal large language model, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024) 39303–39324. 18 [54] W. Wang, Z. Gao, L. Gu, H. Pu, L. Cui, X. Wei, Z. Liu, L. Jing, S. Ye, J. Shao, et al., Internvl3. 5: Advancing open-source multimodal models in versatility, reasoning, and efficiency, arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18265 (2025). [55] H. Lu, W. Liu, B. Zhang, B. Wang, K. Dong, B. Liu, J. Sun, T. Ren, Z. Li, H. Yang, et al., Deepseek-vl: towards real-world vision-language understanding, arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05525 (2024). [56] H. Liu, C. Li, Y. Li, B. Li, Y. Zhang, S. Shen, Y. J. Lee, Llavanext: Improved reasoning, ocr, and world knowledge (2024). 19